Beresheet 
He Carved a Carving in the Upper Light
1) When the King wished to emanate and create the worlds, the harsh spark carved a carving in the upper light. It carved a carving—the departure and restriction of the light, which leaves a place vacant and empty of light. It is regarded as carving because prior to creation, “The upper light had filled the whole of reality.” And when He wished to create the worlds, He made a carving in the upper light, which restricted and ejected the light from around the Malchut. With that carving, a place was made for all the worlds, a spark, a spark of fire, Kashiut , the force of harsh Din in the Kli of Malchut for which the light from around Malchut was restricted and departed.
When the lights wish to come out and be revealed, that spark, in which there is the power of the Dinim, which are called “colors,” struck the expansion of the upper light, and the expansion was pushed back. Out of the pressure and the beating, those fine lights come out and sound as one, along with the expansion of the upper light. Those fine lights are called Ohr Hozer , and the expansion of the upper light is called Ohr Yashar . Then that spark disclosed colors in them, a change of degrees, and they were all painted together, both the Ohr Hozer and the Ohr Yashar, in four colors—red, white, green, and black. These are the four degrees, Hochma, Bina, Tifferet, and Malchut.
That spark ascends in an illumination from below upward, which is called Rosh, and descends in an inversion of the illumination to illuminate from above downward, called Guf. That spark is called “the harsh spark.” That spark corrected and struck all the plantations of the illuminations, and tells each one, “Grow!” That is, out of its beating in the expansion of the upper light, as mentioned, all the levels of all the degrees in the worlds come out and he measures the size of each and every degree.
The harsh spark is a spark that beats on the expansion of the upper light, raises Ohr Hozer and clothes it. All the degrees are born and emerge from that beating, and it is about the power of Tzimtzum in the Kli of Malchut, not to receive the upper light. This was also established later, in the hard Masach, called “fountain.” However, here it is about the beginning of the emergence of the harsh spark from Ein Sof, which was not yet established with a Masach. Rather, it is the force of the Din that caused the restriction of the light from the Kli of Malchut.
The harsh spark came out and was made inside the most hidden of all that are hidden—from Ein Sof, the last Behina of Ein Sof, Malchut de Ein Sof, a form that is considered raw. That is, the form of the Din was still amorphous, completely indistinguishable. The harsh spark was upright and pressed into a circle, meaning at the center of the circle, which is like a ring. It was neither white, nor black, and neither red, nor green.
Explanation: “Before the emanations were emanated and the creatures were created, the upper simple light had filled the whole reality. And there was no vacancy” for the existence of the emanated and the created. “And there was no such part as Rosh or Sof, but all was simple light, equal in one similitude, and it is called “the light of Ein Sof.” And when upon His simple will came the desire to create the worlds and emanate the emanations,” the harsh spark came out, the force of Din that was disclosed in Malchut, emerging from Ein Sof, and carved a carving in the upper light. Thus, the light was restricted and departed from within the Kli of Malchut and around her. That departure of light is called “carving the upper light,” for a space devoid of light was made there. And in that empty space, all the worlds and all that is in them subsequently emerged.
And since the harsh spark, the force of Din, emerged and has just been formed in the last Behina of Ein Sof, it was still unable to disclose any Din in it, but only a root from which all the Dinim in the worlds later expanded and came about. But in itself, it was in a raw, amorphous form, since no form of Din was as yet apparent in it. Similarly, the restricted place, the vacant space, from which the light departed, was also in one similitude, for no form of Din was apparent there at all, and this is called “a round form.” The force of Din was pinned at the center of the circle, in the middle point, where it is like an axis around which all the worlds revolve, to mitigate her and correct her.
Likewise, there were no colors in the space, since the colors are considered Dinim that induce changes in the degrees, and no Din was apparent there yet. The Zohar says, “Neither white,” since white indicates light of Hochma, in which there are no colors and Dinim. And since the light departed and was restricted from there, then there is no white there. But since the light departed, there is another color there—black—indicating absence of light. But he says that there is no black there either, “Nor red,” the color of Bina, “Or green,” the color of Tifferet.
When he measured the level, he made colors illuminate into the space and the carving, since after the Tzimtzum and the carving, a line of light extended its expansion from the light of Ein Sof into the place of the vacant space. The upper Rosh of the expansion extends from Ein Sof himself and touches it, and the end of the expansion was in the place of the harsh spark that stands in the middle point, at the center of the circle. It is so because the harsh spark detains the upper light from passing through it, hence the light ended there.
The expansion of that line of light contains within it four colors: Hochma, Bina, Tifferet, and Malchut. They illuminate inside the restricted place, as it was said that he measured the level, made colors illuminate into the space and the carving, for during the expansion of the line of light, the colors to illuminate to the place were made. But prior to that, there were no colors at all in the restricted place.
Know that there are two actions in the harsh spark: 1) The Zivug de Hakaa from which all the degrees extend. This operation is in Malchut de Rosh, who raises Ohr Hozer from below upward, eliciting ten Sefirot de Rosh, and inverts to illuminate from it and below, eliciting ten Sefirot de Guf. 2) The act of the end of every degree. It is so because when the ten Sefirot de Guf of the degree expand from above downward, from Keter to Malchut, the light cannot be received in Malchut de Guf due to the harsh spark that is there, which detains the light and does not let it spread there, hence the illumination ends.
The harsh spark comes out of Ein Sof to extend crowns and Mochin to all the degrees, for all the Mochin are drawn through a Zivug de Hakaa of the harsh spark. This act of the spark is to lead the Malchut, who is called “the great sea,” so she does not exceed her measure outwards, that is, so she does not receive the upper light into her from the place of the Masach below, of which it is written, “Thus far shall you come, but no further.” That is, the light will come up to the boundary on the Masach and will not spread further, like the sand that limits and ends the waters of the sea, repelling the waves back. For this reason, Malchut of the Rosh is called “mating Malchut,” and Malchut of the Guf is called “ending Malchut.”
You should also know that the expansion of the line of light is Partzuf AK, Keter to the four worlds ABYA. And because there are necessarily four levels one below the other in each expansion—AB, SAG, MA, and BON—that line includes the five Partzufim of AK, as well.
A fountain appeared within the harsh spark, from which the colors below were painted. A fountain is a Masach that was established inside the Malchut, to raise Ohr Hozer, since the Bitush , Zivug de Hakaa with the upper light, an unceasing Zivug, became the Masach, like a fountain endlessly flowing with Ohr Hozer. Colors mean Dinim. Painted means disclosure of the Dinim. Below means in the Sefirot of the Guf.
It is so because the illumination of Ohr Hozer illuminates from below upward and from above downward. Its illumination from below upward is called Rosh, and the colors are not revealed yet in the illumination of the Rosh. Rather, the four colors are evident only in its illumination from above downward, called Guf. This is why it was said that the colors were painted below, meaning the Dinim were disclosed in an illumination from above downward, and not in an illumination from below upward.
The Dinim could not appear from below upward because upper and lower are always cause and consequence, where the lower is caused by the upper. And since the harsh spark is below, in Malchut of the Rosh, illuminating from below upward, the cause—the upper nine Sefirot—are not affected whatsoever by the deficiencies of its consequence—Malchut.
But the Guf is caused by the Zivug de Hakaa of the harsh spark, and the harsh spark is the reason for it. Hence, the Dinim of the harsh spark appear in it, since all the force of the Dinim in the cause appear in its consequence. From this you know that every Aviut and deficiency can operate only from the place of its emergence downward, and not at all from the place of its emergence upward.
2) The most hidden of all that are hidden, from Ein Sof, Malchut de AK, emanated two Partzufim. He fissured and did not fissure, and his Avir is not known at all. One Partzuf is considered a fissure, an emergence of half a degree, VAK with deficiency of GAR, and the other is not a fissure, an emergence of a whole degree. His Avir is the level of Ruach, which is VAK with absence of GAR, unknown, for there is no Zivug for extension of GAR there. “Known” means a Zivug for extension of GAR.
Explanation: The Zohar begins to elucidate how the five Partzufim of Atzilut came out of Malchut de AK. It explains how Malchut de AK emanated Partzuf Keter de Atzilut, called Partzuf Atik, and Nukva de Atik, for Nukva de Atzilut emerged from her as a fissure, and the male of Atik emerged from her not as a fissure. That fissuring is the association of Midat ha Din  with Midat ha Rachamim , called Tzimtzum Bet de AK.
It is as we learn—in the beginning, He contemplated creating the world with Midat ha Din, referring to Malchut de AK, from whose Zivug emerged Partzuf AK, which is Midat ha Din. He saw that the world could not persist, so he brought Midat ha Rachamim and associated it with Midat ha Din. He saw that the worlds could not exist, so He raised Midat ha Din, Malchut de AK, to Bina de AK, Midat ha Rachamim, the mating Malchut, who stood at the end of the Sefirot de Rosh. She rose to the place of Bina de Rosh, and made a Zivug de Hakaa there with the upper light.
It follows that her Ohr Hozer, which rises from below upward, clothed only the two Sefirot KH, and the three Sefirot—Bina and ZON de Rosh—descended from the Rosh and fell into the Guf. And the ending Malchut, who stood below all the Sefirot of the Guf, rose and stood in Bina de Guf, at half the Sefira Tifferet, at the point of Chazeh, since Tifferet is considered Bina de Guf, ending the Partzuf at the place of the point of Chazeh. And Bina and ZON de Guf could not receive any light because they were below the ending Malchut and completely departed from Atzilut.
Because of Malchut’s ascent to the place of Bina, each degree was divided in two. Half of it stayed in the degree, its bottom half came out and descended to the degree below it, the half degree of the Rosh descended into a Guf, and the half degree of the Guf descended below Atzilut. It is therefore considered that each Partzuf that emerges through the association of Midat ha Rachamim with Din, emerges in a division of the degree into two halves.
When Malchut de AK emanated Atik de Atzilut, she emanated the male of Atik undivided, without the association of Midat ha Rachamim, and Atik came out in a complete degree, undivided into two halves. She emanated the Nukva de Atik with association of Midat ha Din with Rachamim, and she emerged divided in the degree—only KH in the Rosh, and KH in the Guf, while Bina, Tifferet, and Malchut de Rosh fell into a Guf, and Bina, Tifferet, and Malchut de Guf fell below the Sium of the whole degree of Atzilut. This is because a new Sium was made for the upper light: the place of Chazeh de Guf, where it is half of Bina de Guf. That new Sium is called Parsa.
The reason why Partzuf Atik and his Nukva include two Behinot together is to have a median between the Partzufim of AK, who emerged undivided, and the Partzufim of the four worlds ABYA, who emerged divided. The male of Atik, who has equivalence with AK, takes from AK, and gives to his Nukva. And the Nukva de Atik, who has equivalence with the Partzufim ABYA, gives to ABYA.
The most hidden of all that is hidden, Malchut de AK, emanated one Partzuf, Atik de Atzilut, as both divided and undivided. The male of Atik is considered undivided, and the Nukva de Atik is considered divided. He put the divided, Nukva de Atik, before the undivided, male of Atik, since the Nukva de Atik preceded the male of Atik because the Nukva was emanated and came out in GAR de Nekudim, and the male came out in the world of Atzilut.
His Avir, the level of Ruach, which is VAK deficient of GAR, is unknown because there is no Zivug there for extension of GAR. The five levels are NRNHY. The level of Ruach is called Avir. It is considered divided because there are only two Sefirot there, KH, and can receive two lights NR, lacking the three lights Neshama, Haya, Yechida, due to the absence of the three Kelim, Bina, Tifferet, and Malchut, as is known in the inverse relation between lights and Kelim, for in the Kelim the upper ones grow first, and in the lights the lower ones enter first. This is why it was said that the level of Avir de Atik, considered a division of Atik, his Nukva, is hidden because he has no Zivug to extend the three lights Neshama, Haya, Yechida, for the Zivug is called Daat  as it is written, “And Adam knew his wife, Eve.”
Finally, out of the beating of the division in Atik, which is the Nukva in Atik, a high and hidden point illuminated—Partzuf AA de Atzilut. That Hakaa  is a Zivug de Hakaa from which all the degrees are emanated and emerge. Indeed, a point is always the name of Malchut, and the reason why AA is called “a high point” is to indicate the difference and the innovation in him in regard to Nukva de Atik, that he has the Malchut that is mitigated in Midat ha Rachamim, which is about to become known, mate, and extend GAR.
That mitigated Malchut is called “a high point” because the Nukva de Atik is hidden, as it is established in a low point, as well, called Man’ula. Although she is considered a division—Malchut that is mitigated in Midat ha Rachamim, called Miftacha—she still has two points, the unmitigated Malchut, as well. This is why she is unknown. Thus, the whole innovation in regard to Nukva de Atik is in the upper point in it. This is why The Zohar calls it, “a high  point” in many places.
It is called “a hidden point,” unlike Malchut de AK, who is called “the most hidden of all that is hidden.” But Malchut in AA is called only “hidden,” for she is above the point that is completely hidden, and this is why the point is called “beginning,” which means the first utterance among all the utterances.
The word Beresheet  implies Partzuf AA de Atzilut, who is called Resheet  because he is the first Partzuf from whom all the Mochin in the worlds are dispensed. But no Mochin comes to the worlds from the Partzufim above him, the Partzufim of AK and the male and female of Atik, since they are completely hidden, as there is no Zivug to bestow Mochin in them. This is so because the Partzufim AK, and male Atik, were established in the unmitigated Malchut de Midat ha Din, in which the world cannot exist. Even Nukva de Atik does not dispense Mochin, as it consists of the two points together, hence she is also hidden.
It follows that the first Partzuf to be seen is Partzuf AA, as it is established at the highest mitigated point alone, the Miftacha. This is why AA was created with the name Resheet. This is why The Zohar elaborated at length thus far, from the beginning of the Tzimtzum through the male and female of Atik de Atzilut, to show us that Partzuf AA is the carrier of the upper point, called Resheet, implied in the first word, Beresheet, in the Torah.
But all the Partzufim and worlds preceding him are not like that. They are hidden and do not dispense to the lower ones. This is why we will not find a single word about them in the Torah, for what we do not attain, we do not know by a name or a word, and the beginning of the root of attainment begins only in AA, who is known, although only as a root for attainment. This is why he is called Beresheet, and this is why he is necessarily the first word in the Torah, for Torah is considered attainment.
The Brightness of the Firmament
3) “And the educated will shine as the brightness of the firmament.” The educated are ZON de Atzilut, or the souls of the righteous. “The brightness of the firmament” is illumination of GAR that appears through the association of Midat ha Rachamim. Here the text relates specifically to Malchut that is mitigated with Midat ha Rachamim, Malchut that divided the whole degree by her ascent to Bina, and made a new Sium in the middle of the Sefirot of the degree, in the place of Bina in the Guf, in the Chazeh. That new Sium is called Parsa, which stands at the Chazeh and ends the Partzuf there. That Parsa in the entrails of the man, in his Chazeh, separates between the organs for vitality—the lung and the heart—and the organs for feeding.
That new Sium is also called “The firmament that divides between the upper water and the lower water.” This is so because there are five Sefirot in the Guf: HGT NH, corresponding to the five Sefirot KHB TM. HGT de Guf are considered KHB, GAR de Guf, and end at the Chazeh, where there is the Parsa, which is called a “firmament.” This is why those HGT are called “upper water.” From the Chazeh and below, Tifferet and Malchut de Guf are called “lower water.” Thus, the firmament stands in the middle of each degree, separating between the upper water and the lower water, as it is written, “Let there be a firmament in the midst of the water, and let it separate between water and water.”
The world would not persist in Midat ha Din, Malchut de AK, before she was mitigated in Bina, since the world is ZON de Atzilut, including people in this world, for all that is received in ZON de Atzilut can be received in people in this world. And all that is not received in ZON is not received in people in this world because we do not receive anything from higher than ZON.
Therefore, if Nukva de ZA, Malchut, were not mitigated in Bina, she would not be fit for reception of any Ohr Yashar, the upper light, but only Ohr Hozer, tiny lights, lights of Din, and then people in this world would be unfit to receive any Mochin—Ohr Yashar from Ein Sof. However, He saw that the world did not persist, so he associated Midat ha Rachamim with it, raising her to Bina, and all the degrees were divided and a new Sium was made, called “firmament,” at the half of each degree. It follows that Malchut that rose to the place of Bina gained two Sefirot that are fit for reception of upper light—Bina and Tifferet—since because Malchut is in the place of Bina, Bina and Tifferet are under her, included in her.
And therefore, once people in this world raise MAN through Mitzvot and good deeds, they extend a new illumination from above, which lowers the Malchut and the place of the Zivug back to her place, below Tifferet, and a complete degree comes out, NRNHY, received in the Sefirot Bina and Tifferet that were previously included in Malchut, and which are fit for reception of upper light. Then the souls of the righteous, too, receive the upper Mochin from ZON de Atzilut because they are included in the upper Malchut.
Thus, all the Mochin are only because of Malchut that rose to Bina, making a new Sium there, called a “firmament.” Were it not for the firmament, ZON would not be able to receive any of the upper light. This is why the text calls those Mochin “The brightness of the firmament,” meaning the light that appears at the end of the association of Rachamim with Din. It is written, “And the educated,” meaning ZON and the souls of the righteous, “Will shine as the brightness of the firmament,” receive Mochin that illuminate like the brightness of the firmament, since all of their Mochin comes from the brightness of the firmament.
This is why The Zohar brings this text, over all the Mochin that were emanated from AA and below, for they all came out from those lights of the brightness of the firmament. This is also why there is attainment to the lower ones in them.
There are three discernments in the brightness of the firmament.
The brightness that is more hidden than all that is hidden, and its Avir, Dechura and Nukva de Atik, since the male of Atik is more hidden than all that is hidden, and his Avir is Nukva de Atik, who emanated to AA in the brightness of the firmament.
The brightness of Beresheet, from which YESHSUT was emanated.
The hidden brightness, YESHSUT, from which all ten utterances in the work of creation were emanated, the Mochin de ZON. But upper AVI are not from the brightness of the firmament, as they are unknown and the Yod did not depart from their Avir.
The first brightness of the firmament is a root to emanate to AA, for he himself is hidden.
The second brightness of the firmament is the carrier of the upper point, Miftacha. This is why it is considered the beginning of all the Mochin of the brightness of the firmament. This is why it is called Beresheet , and this is why those Mochin do not appear in it, rather it gives them to YESHSUT, the third brightness of the firmament. In YESHSUT, all those Mochin, from whom ZON receive, appear in actual fact.
The Avir of the brightness that is more hidden than all that is hidden mated and illuminated in this point. The one who is more hidden than all that is hidden is Atik and his Nukva. And although his Nukva has already been established with the Malchut that is mitigated in Midat ha Rachamim, with the firmament, yet, because she is hidden, she is included in the male of Atik and is called “the most hidden of all that is hidden,” like him. However, she is considered his Avir because she is only half a degree, Kelim KH with lights of Nefesh and Ruach.
The Avir of Atik, which is his Nukva, mated and illuminated in this point, meaning extended illumination to AA, who is called “the upper point,” and the Mochin de GAR, called “brightness of the firmament,” came out in him. And once AA received the illumination of Nukva de Atik, that Resheet, AA, expanded in Rosh and Guf, and made a palace for himself, for honor and glory. That is, he emanated Partzuf upper AVI, who clothed him and surrounded him as a palace.
There are six Partzufim in the world of Atzilut, where one emerges from the other. In each Partzuf there are male and female. They are called Atik and his Nukva, AA and his Nukva, upper AVI, YESHSUT, the great ZON, and the small ZON.
This is the order of their degrees: Avir de Atik emanated AA and his Nukva, AA and his Nukva emanated upper AVI and YESHSUT, and YESHSUT emanated the great ZON and the small ZON. It explains how all those are implied in the verse “Beresheet Barah Elokim et HaShamaim VeEt HaAretz .
AA illuminates two kinds of Mochin in upper AVI, in the palace that he made—which is Partzuf upper AVI, the seed of AA, a seed of holiness—for begetting souls and for the benefit of the world: 1) Mochin de Hassadim to sustain the worlds; 2) Mochin de Gadlut to beget the souls.
4) The brightness that planted a seed in his honor is like a seed of the good silk and purple. The worm that weaves the silk covers itself in the insides of the silk, for so is the nature of that worm—it brings out of itself the silk threads and wraps itself with them around it until it is completely covered by the silk threads and is invisible. Similarly, when AA sows the lights in the palace, YESHSUT, he hides and covers his own lights, and disappears through those Mochin of YESHSUT that he emanates, like the worm that is hidden by the silk threads that she makes.
Out of that seed, he made for himself a palace for glory for himself and for the benefit of all. That second palace is Partzuf YESHSUT, which AA emanated similar to a seed of silk. AA had to disappear during his emanation of that Partzuf, and sowed in that palace the seed of lights for his correction, as it is written, “Wearing light like a garment,” when it is wrapped light, without expansion, and he is hidden. At that time he is called Avir, for the light is made hidden by the letter Yod that entered the word Ohr , forming the combination Avir, a point in his palace.
Malchut is called a “point,” and YESHSUT, which are Bina, are called a “palace.” In the mitigation of Midat ha Rachamim, the point went up to the palace of AA, when Malchut rose to Bina. It follows that the light of the palace was hidden and became Avir, the level of Ruach, since when there are all five lights NRNHY there, it is called “light.” But through the ascent of the point to the palace, the Sium and Zivug was done below the Hochma, and Bina, Tifferet, and Malchut descended outside the palace and below. And because only two Kelim KH remained in the palace, only two lights remained there, NR, and the light of Ruach is called Avir. Thus, due to the ascent of the point to the light of the palace, the light departed from there, from the GAR—Neshama, Haya, Yechida—and only the level of Ruach Nefesh—the Avir—remained there.
It is written, “And God said, ‘Let there be light,’ and there was light.” Afterwards, when the Mochin de Gadlut de YESHSUT illuminated, he lowered the Yod from the Avir once more, and the combination of Ohr  returned to its place as before, since once he returned Malchut to her place, the three Kelim Bina and TM returned and reunited with their degree. And because there are already five Kelim, the five lights NRNHY clothed in them once more.
The entrance of the Yod into the light is the emanation of AA to YESHSUT, for when he emanated to YESHSUT, he raised Malchut to his Bina, a point in his palace, and AA remained with two Kelim KH, in which there are two lights, NR. Then he also emanated to YESHSUT in half the degree, such as him, in two Kelim, KH, and in two lights, NR. It follows that AA, too, had to disappear and diminish in his light into an Avir when he emanated to YESHSUT, like the seed of silk.
By that, the Resheet created that hidden one, which is not known to this palace. It concerns the verse, Beresheet Barah Elokim . By that beginning, he—AA—created that hidden one, the ascent of the Yod to the light of the palace, becoming a hidden Avir, a point in his palace. The one who is hidden to this palace is YESHSUT at the time of Katnut. And because he extends from AA, he is therefore revealed during the Gadlut, for then the Yod comes out from the Avir once more and it becomes light. But if it were extended from Atik it would always remain hidden, and the Yod would never have departed the Avir, as is done in upper AVI that came out of Atik.
The second palace is called Elokim, to distinguish it from the first palace of AA, which is upper AVI, which is not considered Elokim but EKYEH. It is written, “In the beginning God created.” AA, called Resheet , created, emanated the Katnut and concealment, called “hidden brightness,” which in Gadlut is the name Elokim. The word “created” always indicates a formation of something hidden.
5) That palace is glowing, and all ten utterances were created from it, in the expansion of the point from that hidden brightness. The Mochin de Gadlut de ZON are called “utterances.” All the Mochin de ZON came from the hidden brightness of YESHSUT, meaning by an expansion and emergence of the point from the hidden Avir, at which time the letters of Ohr remained.
If in YESHSUT it is written “created,” there is no wonder about what is written, “And God created the man in His own image.”
Interpretation: The man of Atzilut is ZA who came out with the Malchut in two Partzufim. It is known that Malchut was restricted from receiving any Ohr Yashar into her, but only Ohr Hozer. Thus, how can ZON receive Mochin from YESHSUT, which are Ohr Yashar? It explains that if in YESHSUT it is written “created,” that Malchut rose to the place of Bina, and Bina and TM de YESHSUT descended to ZON, there is no wonder that it is written “And God,” Bina, “Created the man,” ZON, “In His own image,” in Mochin de Ima, although they are originally unfit to receive Ohr Yashar. It is so because those Bina and TM de YESHSUT who descended to ZON during the Katnut became one with ZON, receiving the Mochin de Ima in them, which is Ohr Yashar, as Ima  lent her clothes to her daughter.
6) The brightness, AA, is Beresheet, as his name is the first of all. After he interprets the verse, “In the beginning God created,” in general, relating to AA, who emanated to YESHSUT, who is called Elokim , he returns to explain the matters in particular. He says that the word Beresheet is a holy name, and it is the name of AA, whose name is the first of all, for AA—the beginning of everything—is discerned in the Mochin of the brightness of the firmament, as he is the first Partzuf established as a first point, the Miftacha.
The holy name EKYEH is carved on the sides of AA, which are upper AVI who clothe the right and left of AA through the Chazeh. They are the name EKYEH, and they are always in pure Avir, since the Yod never departed from their Avir, while the Mochin of the brightness of the firmament are not in them. The name Elokim is carved in the crown, Mochin de GAR, as it is written, “Go forth and see, O daughters of Zion, King Solomon with the crown with which his mother crowned him.” YESHSUT, the name Elokim, is carved in AA in the crown, in Mochin de GAR.
It relates to the clarification of the names EKYEH Asher EKYEH . The first EKYEH is upper AVI, carved and inscribed on the sides of AA, pure Avir, and hidden. Elokim is carved in AA in GAR, in the brightness of the firmament, YESHSUT. It is a hidden and concealed palace, the beginning of the disclosure of Beresheet. The name Elokim is the word Asher  in EKYEH Asher EKYEH, in a way that the first EKYEH is upper AVI, and Asher is YESHSUT, Elokim, a hidden and concealed palace at the time of Katnut, the beginning of the disclosure of Beresheet. In YESHSUT, the beginning of the disclosure of the Mochin of the brightness of the firmament is from AA, who is Resheet.
Asher is Rosh that came out of Resheet. Asher has the letters of Rosh in a reversed order: Reish is first in Rosh and last in Asher, indicating that it is a Rosh that came out of Resheet, from AA, hence it departed the Rosh and became a Guf without a Rosh.
Explanation: To emanate YESHSUT, AA became covered and hidden, like the seed of the silk that first made that correction of the ascent of Malchut to Bina in his own Partzuf, to emanate YESHSUT to that extent. Therefore, AA was established with only KH in his Rosh, and his Bina departed from the Rosh into the degree of Guf. From that Bina, the Partzufim AVI and YESHSUT were made. Upper AVI were established from her GAR, and YESHSUT were established from her VAK.
For this reason, AVI always remained in the Rosh, even though they are only Hassadim, since the GAR de Bina do not receive Hochma even when they are at the Rosh. And therefore, they do not feel any difference when they are outside the Rosh. YESHSUT, however, ZAT de Bina de AA, whose conduct is to receive Hochma, were diminished from reception of Hochma due to the exit of Bina de AA into the Guf, and are therefore regarded as Guf without a Rosh.
This is why Asher is Rosh that came out of Resheet. The word Asher, whose order of letters is opposite from the combination Rosh, indicates that it was in the Rosh of AA, but came out of it, meaning, YESHSUT, Bina de AA, who came out from Rosh to Guf. For this reason, the letters Asher are like Rosh, and the reason why the order is inverted is because of its exit from the Rosh of Beresheet, the Rosh of AA.
7) Once the point and the palace were established as one, Beresheet, AA, includes a high beginning for the light of Hochma. YESHSUT is called Asher, indicating a Rosh that emerged from Resheet after YESHSUT was established in the point and in the palace as one, in the ascent of the point, Malchut, to Bina, the palace, when only KH remained in AA, and Bina and TM de Rosh de AA came out of the degree of Rosh to below the Rosh. Also, only KH remained in YESHSUT, and his Bina and TM descended to the degree below them, to ZON.
When that diminution took place, a high beginning for disclosure of Hochma to the lower ones was included in AA. That is, were it not for that diminution, the Mochin de Hochma would not have reached ZON and the souls of the righteous. Afterwards the appearance of that palace changed and it was called “a house.”
Commentary: During the diminution, when the point and palace were established as one, the palace was only in light of Hassadim, without Hochma—a Guf without a Rosh—for the point entered the light of the palace and the light became Avir, which is light of Hassadim. At the time of Gadlut, the Yod exits the Avir by raising MAN from the good deeds of the righteous, and the palace returns to being light. Then it is considered that the color of Hassadim of the palace had changed and regained the color of Hochma. Then the name of the palace also change to be called a “house,” since when there is light of Hochma in the palace, it is called a “house.”
When the point is in the Avir, the light is hidden and is not seen at all. And when the illumination expands to be disclosed, a point comes out of that Avir, and what remains after the elicitation of the point is light. And once that point has come out of that light, the light clothed in the upper palace in four colors, HB TM, and then it is a house. And it is said about it, “In wisdom  shall a house be built,” for when the Yod comes out of the Avir and returns to being light, the name of the palace is changed into being called a “house.”
However, this is after the clothing of Hochma in Hassadim, a clothing with which the four colors HB TM expand. This will be called below, “expansion for settling the house.” However, here there was still no clothing of Hochma in Hassadim, but only light of Hochma without Hassadim. It follows that the color of Hassadim only changed to the color of Hochma, and for this reason it is considered that the light is hidden and does not illuminate because the light of Hochma cannot illuminate without a clothing of light of Hassadim.
This is why the exit of the Yod from the Avir and the disclosure of the light of Hochma is called “expansion of the correction of the house,” to discern that there is still no expansion for settling of the house here yet, for as long as the light is hidden, there is no settlement in the house, in which to live. Rather, it is the first correction, as it is impossible to obtain GAR without this correction. This is why it is referred to as only correction of the house, and not the settling of the house.
This is why it was said that the appearance of that palace had changed and it was called “a house.” That is, the color of Hassadim in the palace changed into the color of Hochma, and it is called “a house.” And the upper point, Partzuf AA, is called Rosh, and they are included in one another in the form of Resheet, meaning although the color of Hassadim had changed into light of Hochma, the house still cannot stand in itself as settling of the house, for lack of clothing in light of Hassadim. It is therefore considered that the house is still included in AA, who is called a Rosh, and the combination Bet-Rosh together was made on it, meaning the letters of Beresheet. This indicates that the house still does not illuminate by itself, but is still included in the illumination of AA.
That illumination is called Mochin de VAK because when the Yod was in the light of the palace, the palace was in the form of Avir, Hassadim without Hochma, which is called VAK without a Rosh. And now that the Yod departed the Avir of the palace and the palace returned to being light of Hochma, GAR, it is regarded as only Mochin de VAK, for although there are Mochin, he is still like VAK without GAR due to the absence of Hassadim, for the light of Hochma cannot illuminate without clothing in light of Hassadim.
Bet Rosh are included in one another in Beresheet as long as they are as one, as long as there is no settling of the house, when there is still no clothing of Hochma in Hassadim, which reveals four colors in the house, HB TM, which are Mochin de GAR. But prior to that, it is considered merely Mochin de VAK because the Hochma does not illuminate without clothing in Hassadim.
Once he is sown for the correction of the settling, he is called a hidden and concealed God. Commentary: When the Yod entered the light and became Avir, the degree was divided into two halves. KH alone remained in the degree, and Bina and TM fell to the degree below it. YESHSUT is called Elokim. It follows that once he remained at half the degree, it is considered that two letters MI de Elokim remained in the degree of YESHSUT, the three letters ELEH fell from the degree of YESHSUT to the degree below it, and the name Elokim completely disappeared from them.
But afterwards the point departed from the Avir of the palace and the palace returned to being light of Hochma. It is so because a superior illumination is drawn from AB SAG de AK through the MAN of the righteous, which takes Malchut out of the place of Bina, and returns her to her place as before. At that time the three Kelim Bina and ZON, called ELEH, reunite with MI that remained in YESHSUT, and then the name Elokim reappears in YESHSUT as before. However, it is considered that the name Elokim is hidden and concealed in YESHSUT due to the lack of clothing in Hassadim.
Once he was sown for the correction of the settling, he was called “a hidden and concealed God.” That is, although there is still no expansion of the settling there, which is Mochin de GAR that illuminate, still, because there was a correction that qualifies the expansion of the settlement—through the exit of the Yod from Avir, elevating ELEH back to YESHSUT—the name Elokim was completed in them. However, it is considered a hidden and concealed God, as long as there is no expansion for the settlement of the house there yet.
8) The brightness is hidden and concealed before the sons come into him to beget and the house stands in the expansion of the correction of the holy seed. As long as she did not conceive and the expansion of settling the house did not expand, he is still not called Elokim. Rather, he is all still Beresheet. That is, before the four corrections expand, he is not called Elokim because he is not illuminating perfectly. It is considered that everything is still included in AA, who is called Resheet.
There are four corrections here: first Ibur , Mochin de VAK, second Ibur, and Mochin de GAR. This is their order: 1) Before the sons come into him to beget, it is the first Ibur, the entrance of the Yod into the light, which became Avir, at which time the VAK of the degree exit. 2) The house stands in the expansion of the correction of a holy seed, the correction of the exit of the Yod from Avir, which is called Mochin de VAK. 3) As long as she did not conceive, it is the second Ibur of ZON, as they are attached to the letters ELEH from Katnut. When the Yod departed from Avir and ELEH rose from ZON, the ZON rise with them to YESHSUT, and this is considered the second Ibur. 4) The expansion of settling in the house did not expand, meaning the expansion of Mochin de GAR, at which time it was considered settling in the house.
This is why it was said, “The brightness is hidden and concealed: 1) before the sons came into to him to beget, 2) the house stands in the expansion of the correction of a holy seed, 3) as long as she did not conceive, and 4) the expansion of settling in the house did not expand.
Before YESHSUT went through these four corrections one at a time, YESHSUT was not called Elokim. Rather, he was all still Beresheet, AA. And the reason why in the second correction he is called Elokim is that he is hidden and concealed there, and does not illuminate at all. But at the end of those four corrections, he is called Elokim, illuminating the entire Mochin to the ZON.
When the four corrections were completed and he was established in the name Elokim, he emitted these offspring from that seed that was sown in him. That is, once YESHSUT went through the four corrections—Ibur for VAK, Mochin de VAK, a second Ibur for VAK de Gadlut, and Mochin de GAR de Gadlut—the name Elokim illuminates in full in YESHSUT, and emanates the Mochin to the sons, ZON, who rose to him in the two conceptions, for the Mochin de ZON are the seed that was sown in YESHSUT.
Who is that seed in YESHSUT? He is those carved letters, the Torah, ZA, who is called Torah, emerging from that same point, which is AA, for while being in conceptions in YESHSUT, he receives Mochin de Hochma from AA.
9) The upper point, AA, sowed three points within the palace, YESHSUT: Holam, Shuruk, and Hirik. Holam is the color Hassadim, a point, and a palace as one. Shuruk is the color Hochma, a hidden light. Hirik is dressed in the glory of Hassadim, coming out on Masach de ZON, clothing the color Hochma in the color of Hassadim one within the other, and both illuminate in full.
Explanation: You find that there are three sowings here, for each concealment that is done in the light is regarded as sowing.
The first sowing is when YESHSUT come out of Rosh de AA, in Asher, a Rosh that departed from Resheet and was established in a point and a palace as one. The GAR of lights disappeared from them and they remained in VAK without a Rosh. At that time their three letters ELEH fell to the degree of ZON, and YESHSUT remained with only two Kelim GE, the letters MI.
The second sowing is when the color of that palace changed from the color Hassadim to the color Hochma because the point that was in the place of Bina returned to the place of the Peh, and the three Kelim Bina and TM, ELEH, rose and united with YESHSUT, and could rise to Rosh AA to receive the color Hochma. However, they became a hidden brightness due to lack of Hassadim.
The third sowing is after YESHSUT raised their three Kelim ELEH. ZON rose along with them because the upper one who descends to the lower one becomes exactly like it. And because the Kelim ELEH of YESHSUT fell to the place of ZON, they became attached to ZON as a single degree. Therefore, now that YESHSUT raised ELEH back to their degree, ZON were pulled along with them to the degree of YESHSUT. Thus, it is considered that YESHSUT, Tevuna, was conceived with the ZON, since they came into her like a fetus placed in its mother’s entrails, eating what its mother eats. That is, they receive there from all the lights that are in Tevuna, as though they truly were from Tevuna herself. And regarding YESHSUT, the coming of ZON into them is regarded as sowing because they are a lower Behina than they, and they are made more turbid to an extent, due to their Hitkalelut with them.
Those three sowings are called Holam, Shuruk, and Hirik. The first sowing is Holam, Asher, a Rosh that departed from Resheet. The second sowing is Shuruk, when the color of that palace had changed from the color of the light of Hassadim to the color of the light of Hochma, becoming a concealed brightness. The third sowing is Hirik, into which the ZON rose with their letters ELEH, and the Tevuna was diminished because she was impregnated with ZON.
The letters are Kelim, and the point of Holam stands above the letters. At the exit of Bina from Rosh de AA to VAK, there is light of GAR de YESHSUT that remains inside Rosh de AA and does not clothe inside the Kelim de YESHSUT. This is similar to the point of Holam, which is not inside the letters but above them. This is why this sowing is called Holam.
The point of Shuruk, Melafom, is Vav and a point within it . The point is clothed inside the letters, which are Kelim. Likewise, when YESHSUT brought the letters ELEH back to them and rose to Rosh de AA, the light of GAR de AA came into their Kelim once more, like the point of Shuruk that is clothed inside the letters. This is why this sowing is called Shuruk.
The point of Hirik stands below the letters, which are the Kelim. Also, that diminution, which YESHSUT obtain because of the ZON that connected to them, is not from the degree of their own Kelim, but from a degree below their Kelim, which are the ZON below them, like the point of Hirik that stands below the letters. This is why this sowing is called Hirik.
That upper point, AA, is a seed inside that palace, Bina, the three points—Holam, Shuruk, Hirik. They were included in one another and became one, a voice that comes out of the bonding of three points together.
Commentary: After the point, AA, sowed three sowings—Holam, Shuruk, Hirik—in YESHSUT, called a “palace,” YESHSUT were considered Elokim, hidden and concealed. When the level of Hassadim came out on Masach de Hirik—who is a Masach of Behina Aleph in ZON, who mates with the upper light and the level of NR, which is the level of Hassadim, comes out on it—the light of Hochma clothed in a garment of honor that illuminated, created ELEH, and they were completed in the name Elokim. This is because the level of Hassadim became a garment of honor for the light of Hochma, and then MI, which is the Holam, connected with the letters ELEH that rose and connected to her at the point of Shuruk, and the name Elokim appeared through a garment of honor of Hassadim that emerged through the Masach de Hirik. It is now considered that all three sowings were complemented together through the Masach de Hirik, through the level of Hassadim that emerged through it.
The level of Hassadim complemented all of them, and they were all connected by it, included in one another as one Behina, for in the absence of one of them, that wholeness would have been denied. Now, however, they have all four colors HB HG, since HB came out through MI ELEH, which are Holam Shuruk, and HG through the Masach in Hirik. They complement one another and became one voice.
Also, ZA is called a “voice,” which is the Hirik on which the level of Hassadim came out, connected MI ELEH in the holy name Elokim, and the lower one, who complements the upper one, is rewarded with the same measure of Mochin that it complemented to the upper one. It follows that on all of those four colors HB HG that emerged through completion of the three sowings, Holam, Shuruk, Hirik, ZA was rewarded with them because they came out only through him.
This is why it was said, “And they became one,” a voice that comes out of connecting three points together, since Holam, Shuruk, Hirik, all bonded in the Mochin of ZA and were born and emerged from YESHSUT outward, coming to his place in those Mochin, HB HG, which bonded in him in a single bonding.
When the voice came out, his mate went out with him. She includes all the letters, as it is written, “The heaven,” which are a voice and his mate.
Commentary: The meaning of male and female is that the light is ascribed to the male, and the Kelim, the letters, to the female. This is why the Nukva is called Et , indicating that all the letters from Aleph to Tav are included in her. Hence, when ZA came out and was born from Bina, arriving at his place, Nukva—who includes all the Kelim, called “letters”—went out with him, as it is written, “The heaven,” where “heaven” is ZA, called a “voice,” and “the” is the name of the Nukva. Thus, the voice and his mate, who are ZON, came out.
The voice, heaven, is the last name EKYEH, since EKYEH Asher EKYEH  are HBD. The first EKYEH is Hochma, Asher is Bina, and the last EKYEH is Daat. The Sefira Daat is ZON in Mochin de Bina, since because the whole essence of Mochin de YESHSUT is to complement the holy name Elokim, it is through the Hirik in ZON, which rose with the letters ELEH, meaning through the level of Hassadim and Gevurot that emerged there on his Masach. Hence, ZON necessarily leaves his Behina there even after his exit and birth into his place, for were it not for his garment of Hassadim, the name Elokim would not be completed there.
The ZON that he left in YESHSUT, to be the level of HG there, to always clothe the light of Hochma with his illuminating garment, is called “the Sefira Daat.” Thus, the Sefira Daat is ZA himself, who stayed, to illuminate in YESHSUT. But since the Nukva is always included in the Guf of ZA, there are two Behinot in Daat: right and left. The right is called Hassadim, the male in Daat. The left is called Gevurot, his Nukva. However, both are considered ZA himself, hence the voice, heaven, is the last name EKYEH, the Daat in Bina. But must not be interpreted as actual ZON, since the name EKYEH is only in Bina, and not in ZA, but applies to Daat.
The last EKYEH, the brightness, includes all the letters and colors in this manner. Colors are HB TM, and letters are Kelim. The last EKYEH, ZA, heaven, light of Hassadim, comes out and clothes Hochma, and MI ELEH unite in the name Elokim. Thus, his brightness includes all the letters, which are the Kelim, and all the colors, which are the lights, since they came out only through the Masach de Hirik in him, for all the sowings of Holam, Shuruk, Hirik are included in ZA. This is why that voice includes all of them.
10) Thus far is “The Lord our God the Lord.” These three degrees correspond to the upper secret, “In the beginning God created,” since “The Lord Our God the Lord” are HBD. “The Lord” is Hochma, “Our God” is Bina, and “The Lord” is Daat. Also, “In the beginning God created” and “I will be that which I will be” are also HBD.
All that is clarified thus far is “The Lord our God the Lord.” Those three degrees, which are three degrees in the three names HBD, correspond to “In the beginning God created.” “In the beginning” is the first “I will be,” Hochma. “ created” is “that which,” which came out of the Rosh, as well as his return to the Rosh in a hidden brightness, which is Bina, Elokim, hidden and concealed, for He is deep and hidden in his name and cannot be revealed without Hassadim. And the revealed Elokim is the last “I will be,” Daat.
This is so because once the level of HG emerged on Masach de ZON and the Hochma clothed in Hassadim, MI conjoined with ELEH, and the name Elokim was completed, since the disclosure of the name Elokim came only in the last EKYEH , which is Daat and ZON. Thus, “In the beginning God created” are also HBD, like “I will be that which I will be,” and like “The Lord our God the Lord.”
The word Beresheet  is the primordial one. Hochma is called Resheet . “Created” indicates a hidden secret, so that everything will expand from there, since “created” indicates concealment and diminution. It is the sowing of Holam, Shuruk, Hirik, for everything expands and persists through that sowing. The name Elokim is to keep everything below, since by connecting MI ELEH to complement the name Elokim through clothing of Hassadim that illuminate in Daat, everyone exists from him, meaning HB and ZON below.
“The heaven” indicates male and female as one. It is forbidden to separate them. ZA is called “heaven,” Nukva is called Et , and it follows that “The heaven” indicates the male and female together. This is why the Nukva is implied in ZA, as well, to show that it is forbidden to separate them, but to unite them as one, which are voice and speech, HaVaYaH ADNI, and the voice and speech are unified as one.
11) When Et  takes all the letters, she is the inclusion of all the letters, Rosh and Sof. Nukva is called Et when she takes all the letters because the letters are Kelim, and the Kelim are included only in the Nukva. She is the inclusion from Rosh  Aleph, to Sof  Tav. This is why the Nukva is called Et .
Afterwards, the letter Hey joins the Et to connect the 22 letters with the Hey, since once they have already mingled with all the letters of ZAT, the first Hey from Ima joins her, and then she is fit for a Zivug with ZA. At that time she is called Atah , as it is written, “You revive them all,” for by her Zivug with ZA, she can revive all her hosts in the three worlds BYA and bestow upon them all that they need.
Et is ADNI. “The heaven” is HaVaYaH, who is the upper one of the name ADNI, since ZA is called “heaven,” and is called “voice.” He is HaVaYaH, and his Nukva, Et, is called “speech,” and she is ADNI.
12) “And the earth” indicates the correction of male and female in regard to “And the Lord.” It is all one because as the heaven in the words, “The heaven,” include male and female, the Nukva, earth, consists of male and female. This is implied in the word “And the,” for Et , the Nukva, is Vav, the male in the Nukva.
The difference between the heaven, the upper ZA, voice, and the lower ZA, included in the letter Vav in the word “And the,” is why he brings the matter of “And the Lord,” that the Vav is to include His courthouse, the Nukva, who is included with Him together. It is so because wherever it is said, “And the Lord,” it means He and His courthouse. Likewise, ZA that is included in Nukva here in the letter Vav in the word, “And the,” is included in His courthouse, the Nukva.
This is so because ZON divide into two Partzufim, as it is written, “And I am a smooth man.” From the Chazeh and above, they are called Israel and Leah, and from the Chazeh and below they are called Jacob and Rachel. Hence, “The heaven” are the upper male and female, called Israel and Leah, from Chazeh de ZON and above, and “And the earth” are the bottom male and Nukva, who are called Jacob and Rachel, below ZA.
He calls the Nukva of “The heaven” by the name ADNI, which is the name of the small Rachel, since it is about Mochin de Gadlut de ZON. This is so because only during the Gadlut are ZON called “voice” and “speech,” for then the ZON are PBP  on the same level, for the small Nukva, Rachel, ascends to the Nukva of the great Nukva, Leah, and clothes her. This is why at that time Nukva is named after the small Nukva, ADNI, for then the small Nukva has grown to the level of the great Nukva, and at that time her name is ADNI, the unification of the name HaVaYaHADNI, voice and speech as one.
The earth is the name Elokim, like the upper one, who is fit to produce fruit and offspring. The Nukva is called “earth” only when Ima lends her clothes to her daughter and was established like the upper one, with Mochin of Elokim, which is Bina, in a lower unification. At that time, what was dry became a land that bears fruit and offspring.
That name is included in three places, and from there the wholeness of the name Elokim is clarified by connecting in three places:
MI, Asher, which came out of Resheet, since her place was at Rosh AA and emerged to the place of his Guf.
The letters ELEH, her AHP, which fell to ZON and acquired a new place once more, then returned to their place in Gadlut.
After the return of the letters ELEH with ZON to her degree she receives the level HG, which comes out on Masach de ZON that are attached to their ELEH. At that time the light of Hochma dresses in Hassadim, MI connects to the letters ELEH, and the name Elokim is completed. The name Elokim appears only by collecting three places, since from there the name Elokim has many combinations, as there are 120 combinations of Elokim, according to the change of the governance of three places.
Thus far is the meaning of the concealment in concealments that carved, built, and sustained in a hidden way, in one verse.
Commentary: Carved, built, and sustained are three places. “Carved” is the point of Holam that took out the Bina from Rosh to VAK, by which her letters ELEH fell to ZON. It is considered that a carving and deficiency were made in her because she lost the letters ELEH.
“Built” refers to the return of the letters ELEH to her, and its return to Rosh AA, the place of Hochma. This is considered a complete structure of her ten Sefirot in terms of the Kelim, for now she obtained the letters ELEH and her ten Sefirot were completed in terms of the Kelim. Also, she rose to the place of Hochma, although she still has no existence there to receive the Hochma from AA due to lack of Hassadim. Thus, she needs sustenance.
This is the meaning of “Sustained,” since in the Zivug on Masach de Hirik, when she obtained a clothing of Hassadim, the light of Hochma clothed inside the Hassadim, and her Mochin existed in the four colors HBD.
All of that is in a hidden manner, in the three sowings, Holam, Shuruk, Hirik, implied in the verse, “And the educated will shine as the brightness of the firmament.”
13) Beresheet has the letters Bet-Reish-Aleph Shin-Yod-Tav (6). “From the end of the heaven to the end of the heaven” there is VAK that expand from the upper one, since Beresheet is AA, the letters Bet-Reish-Aleph Shin-Yod-Tav, to indicate that AA is the root of VAK de ZA. ZA is called “heaven.” “From the end of the heaven to the end of the heaven” includes all the Sefirot in ZA, all of his VAK, all of which he took from the upper VAK that extend from the upper AA in the expansion of “created.”
Commentary: Through Asher  that emerged from the Rosh of Beresheet—which is expansion of “created,” which is a hidden brightness that includes Holam, Shuruk, and Hirik—ZA obtained upper VAK from AA, VAK de Hochma in voice and speech.
Out of the first point, AA, he created an expansion of one point above. Because AA took Bina out, he created an expansion of one point above. By taking it out, a point entered the light of Bina and became Avir. This is “created.” By that, an expansion of the point from the Avir and her return to the light were created, as all the Mochin de ZON are from here. Thus, out of the first point, which is AA, he created an expansion of the point from Avir, from which comes the VAK de ZA, implied in Beresheet, Bet-Reish-Aleph Shin-Yod-Tav.
And regarding what was said, one point above, The Book of Zohar implies two points that exist in the Masach of upper AVI, which are called Man’ula  and Miftacha . The expansion of the Yod from Avir is only on one of those points, the Miftacha, but the point of Man’ula remains in upper AVI and does not come out of the Avir of upper AVI.
Here the name of 42 letters was carved. Commentary: The carving of the name 42 is three hands of Ima that were renewed by AA taking Bina outside, which are the letters ELEH of Ima, regarded as HGT de Ima, which are called hands. It is so because with these hands she raises the ZON to her. By exiting the Rosh, her ELEH fell to ZON, hence while raising the letters ELEH back to her, the ZON are also drawn with them to the Rosh. They are like hands that raise the ZON from their lowly place to her own place.
Three times 14 is 42 in Gematria. This is the meaning of the name Mem-Bet  being called “the elevating name.” Yet, the name Mem-Bet itself is from the Chazeh of AA and above, where there are three Partzufim, Atik, AA, and AVI. Those are:
Simple HaVaYaH, four letters, Partzuf Keter, which is Atik, Keter of MA.
HaVaYaH filled with Yod, the letters of Partzuf Hochma, which is AA, AB of MA.
HaVaYaH filled with the filling of 28 letters, Partzuf Bina, which is AVI, SAG of MA.
Dalet, Yod, and 28 letters of the 42 letters together. And since ZA ascends to Bina, he obtains there GAR from Chazeh of AA and above, which are three Partzufim KHB, which are 42 letters.
Taamim, Nekudot , and Otiot 
14) And the educated will shine like the Taamim that play , and the letters and the points follow their tune. The ten Sefirot divide into three mains: Taamim, Nekudot, Otiot. Taamim are Keter, Nekudot are Hochma, and Otiot are YESHSUT and ZON. But this is only regarding the Kelim. In regard to the Mochin, Taamim are considered Hochma, Nekudot are Bina, and Otiot are ZON.
The difference between the Mochin and the Kelim extends from the two Partzufim of AK, since the Kelim extend from Partzuf Keter de AK, where the lights are properly clothed in their Kelim. However, the Mochin extend only from Partzuf AB de AK, where their lights are inverted in the order of their clothing in the Kelim because it is lacking Malchut de Kelim and Keter of lights. For this reason, the light of Hochma clothed there in his Kli de Keter, the light of Bina in the Kli of Hochma, and the light of ZA in the Kli of Bina.
For this reason, regarding the Partzufim and the Kelim that extend from Partzuf Keter de AK, Taamim are discerned in Keter, Nekudot in Hochma, and Otiot in Bina. However, it only relates to the Mochin, which extend only from AB de AK, that the light of Hochma is clothed in his Keter, the light of Bina in his Hochma, and the light of ZA in his Bina. Thus, Taamim are from light of Hochma, Nekudot are from light of Bina, and Otiot are in ZON.
Taamim are the brightness of the firmament, Nekudot are Holam, Shuruk, and Hirik in Bina, and Otiot are in the two Partzufim of ZON, which are as it is written, “The heaven and the earth.” The Taamim, Nekudot, and Otiot divide into Taamim, Nekudot, and Otiot themselves: Taamim, Nekudot, and Otiot in Taamim, in Nekudot, and in Otiot, and they are three Behinot RTS  in each of the Taamim, the Nekudot, and the Otiot.
RTS de Taamim are upper Taamim, middle Taamim, and lower Taamim, meaning Taamim above the letters, like Pshat and Revi’i, inside the letters, comma and dash, and below the letters, like Mercha and Tipcha. It is similar in the Nekudot above the letters, like Holam, and inside the letters, like Shuruk, Melafom, where the point is inside the letter Vav, like this, , and below the letters, like the Hirik. It is also likewise in the letters, which are ZON.
First, The Zohar brought three discernments in the Taamim, which are the three kinds of brightness: 1) Brightness that is more hidden than all that is hidden, the brightness of Atik. This is so because Atik is Keter de Atzilut, and therefore he is Taamim de Taamim. 2) The brightness of Beresheet, AA, the middle Taamim, Nekudot de Taamim. 3) The hidden brightness, YESHSUT, lower Taamim, Otiot de Taamim.
Here it begins with Atik, Keter, as it speaks of Partzufim and Kelim that extend from Partzuf Keter de AK. Afterwards it brought the three kinds of brightness once more, which it interprets over the names EKYEH Asher EKYEH , Mochin HBD, in regard to “In the beginning God created.”
He changes the order there:
The first brightness is brightness of Beresheet, AA, and not Atik. This is so because the Mochin extend from AB de AK, in which there is light of Hochma in Kli de Keter. It follows that the Taamim are Hochma, AA, and upper AVI are Taamim de Taamim, the first EKYEH.
The second brightness is a hidden brightness, YESHSUT and Bina, which are Nekudot de Taamim, and middle Taamim.
The third brightness is a brightness that includes all the letters and colors, ZON, the Daat, the last EKYEH, Otiot de Taamim.
The Nekudot, YESHSUT, which are Asher, which came out of Resheet, divide into upper ones, middle ones, and lower ones, RTS, Taamim, Nekudot, Otiot de Nekudot. This is because the Holam, MI, is the upper Nekudot, Taamim de Nekudot, the Shuruk, ELEH, is the middle Nekudot, Nekudot de Nekudot, and the Hirik, ZON that are attached to ELEH, the bottom Nekudot, are Otiot de Nekudot. All those are included in the word “created.”
The Otiot, ZON, divide into two Behinot ZON, as it is written, “The heaven and the earth.” The Otiot, too, divide into three Behinot, RTS, which are Taamim Nekudot, Otiot in Otiot. Since the great ZON—included in the “The heaven”—are Taamim de Otiot, great Otiot, the great VAK, the small ZA, Jacob, is the middle Otiot, Nekudot de Otiot, and the small Nukva, Rachel, is small Otiot, Otiot de Otiot.
It follows that the word Beresheet is Taamim, which are AA and upper AVI, and there are three brightnesses in them: Taamim, Nekudot, Otiot de Taamim. Their own essence is Taamim de Taamim; what they illuminate to YESHSUT in a hidden brightness are Nekudot de Taamim; and what they illuminate to ZON in the brightness that includes all the letters and colors are Otiot de Taamim.
The word “created” is Nekudot, YESHSUT, themselves divided into three Behinot—Taamim, Nekudot, Otiot, and in Nekudot. What they receive from AVI is regarded as upper Nekudot, Holam, Taamim de Nekudot, and their own Behina is the middle Nekudot, Shuruk, Nekudot de Nekudot. What they illuminate to ZON are Otiot de Nekudot, Hirik.
The words, “The heaven and the earth,” considered Otiot, divide into Taamim, Nekudot, Otiot de Otiot, RTS de Otiot. The great ZON is “the heaven,” Taamim de Otiot, which receive from AVI, and the small ZA, Jacob, is Nekudot de Otiot, which receive from YESHSUT, Vav, in the verse, “And the earth.” The small Nukva, Rachel, is Otiot de Otiot, the essence of the Otiot themselves.
This is why it was said, “The educated,” the Otiot, “Will shine,” with their points, “Like the Taamim that play.” And according to the tune of the Taamim, the Otiot and their Nekudot follow them like armies after their king. Taamim are upper AVI, Nekudot are YESHSUT, and Otiot are ZON. He says that ZON are called “educated,” shining with the Mochin that they receive from YESHSUT, which are called Nekudot, according to the light of Taamim, which are upper AVI, where YESHSUT and ZON are drawn and follow AVI like armies after their king. This is in general.
Otiot are Guf, and Nekudot are Ruach to them. They all travel in their journeys after the Taamim, and receive their sustenance, since Nekudot and Otiot are similar to a body with the vital spirit in it. Otiot without Nekudot are like a body without a spirit. Likewise, ZON, Otiot, all the vital spirit in them extends from YESHSUT, for were it not for YESHSUT who illuminates in them, there would be no vital spirit in them at all. However, YESHSUT—the vital spirit of ZON—also receive their sustenance and vitality from upper AVI, which are the Taamim, while the Otiot and the Nekudot travel in their journeys after the melody of the Taamim, receiving from them their entire vitality and the height of their level.
When the tune of Taamim travels, the Otiot and Nekudot travel after it. When the tune of Taamim stops, they do not travel, as it is written, “By the word of the Lord they camp; by the word of the Lord they journey.” If the Taamim journey, giving their lights to the Nekudot and Otiot, they journey. If the Taamim camp, arresting their bestowal upon the Nekudot and Otiot, the Nekudot and Otiot camp.
It is as we find in the tune of the Taamim that turn the words, which are the punctuated letters, from one end to the next. It is likewise with the bestowal of AVI, the Taamim, they govern the Mochin de YESHSUT and ZON to turn them from one end to the next. For example, when a person tells his friend, “I will give you an important book,” this could have a context of giving and expansion from him to his friend, if they are in a tune of contentment, but it could have the opposite meaning, negation and arrest of giving, if he said it in a tune of surprise.
Thus, the words have no meaning in themselves, but only according to the tune and their Taamim. So is the impact of the Mochin de AVI on YESHSUT and ZON. There is no meaning to the Mochin, neither positive nor negative, but only according to the illumination of AVI to them.
15) “And the educated will shine as the brightness of the firmament, and those who lead the many to righteousness are as stars.” “And the educated will shine” are the illuminating Otiot and Nekudot. “As the brightness” is the tune of the Taamim. “The firmament” is the expansion in the sound of the melody—all those Taamim that spread in the expansion of the tune. “Those who lead the many to righteousness are Taamim that stop, ceasing the journeying of the melodies of the Taamim, for which the meaning of the word is clearly heard.
“And the educated will shine” are Otiot and Nekudot. The educated are Otiot, ZON, whose brightness and vitality are entirely from the Nekudot, YESHSUT. The brightness of the Nekudot, YESHSUT, is according to the brightness that they receive from the Taamim, AVI.
Also, there are two tenets in the melody of the Taamim. There are Taamim that indicate existence and giving, or indicate negation and cessation of giving. The firmament indicates the Taamim that indicate expansion and giving, when he says the phrase in a melody of contentment, when they go in a tune of expansion to the receiver.
The name, “Those who lead the many to righteousness” points to those tunes of Taamim, which indicate negation and cessation of the abundance, which stops the expansion of abundance to the receivers in a melody of surprise. It follows that those are the Taamim that stop the journeying of the Nekudot and the Otiot, since they arrest their abundance and vitality.
Hence, on the whole there are two Behinot of Taamim: The first is called “expansion of the melody,” which indicates giving and expansion of the abundance. This is called “The brightness of the firmament.” The second is called “cessation of the Taamim,” indicating cessation of the abundance and negation. They are called “Those who lead the many to righteousness.”
He says that those Taamim that stop are as necessary as the expansion of the melody, since through the Taamim that stop, the words are heard, like the comma and the dash in the Taamim, which are placed between words. Without them, the world would be mixed and would not be understood.
“Will shine” means the Otiot and the Nekudot that illuminate as one in the journeys in concealment, in a journey through those hidden paths. Otiot are ZON, Nekudot are YESHSUT, and journeys are the ways of the expansion of the abundance. In concealment, YESHSUT is called “a hidden brightness.” “Hidden paths” are three sowings—Holam, Shuruk, and Hirik.
We have already explained the three Behinot of brightness:
The brightness of Beresheet, AA and upper AVI, to which the word Beresheet implies, and which are called Taamim.
The hidden and concealed brightness, which is the Asher that came out of Beresheet, the three Nekudot —Holam, Shuruk, Hirik—three sowings and concealments. Holam is Bina that came out of Rosh de Bina de AA into VAK without a Rosh. Asher went out of Beresheet, leaving only MI in her, and the three letters ELEH descended to ZON.
Shuruk is the return of the letters ELEH to her degree with the ZON attached to them. It is her return to Hochma, to Rosh de AA, where she obtains concealment, for lack of light of Hassadim because AA is entirely Hochma. Even the Hochma cannot receive from him, for lack of clothing of Hassadim. Hence, Bina is considered a hidden and concealed Elokim. Hirik is the diminution of Bina by the force of ZON, which are attached to her letters ELEH, as they are of inferior value compared to Bina and diminish her. Because of those three sowings, that Bina, YESHSUT, is regarded as a hidden brightness and Nekudot.
A brightness that contains all the Otiot and colors. It is the level of Zivug that extends from upper AVI to Bina on her Masach de Nekudot Hirik, at which time a voice came out, the Daat, complementing with it the three Nekudot in full. It is so because through the level of Hassadim that emerged on the Masach de Hirik, the light of Hochma clothed in that illuminating clothing, and now YESHSUT can receive the light from AA, completing the name Elokim.
Daat is regarded as a voice because before the Zivug on the point of Hirik of ZA is done, the Mochin are not heard. They were not known to the lower ones and were concealed in the Holam, Shuruk, Hirik of Bina in a hidden brightness, deep and concealed in his name. However, after the Zivug on the concealment of Hirik, Masach de ZON, was made, and the level of Hassadim appeared, Hochma clothed in Hassadim, and the Mochin of the three points appeared in full. This is considered that the voice was heard.
This is why the ZON are called “sound,” since were it not for their Masach, which clung to the letters ELEH of Bina, all the Mochin de Bina would remain in a whisper, unknown to the worlds. This is why this brightness of the Daat is regarded as brightness that contains all the letters and colors, since after the Hochma dresses in the level of Hassadim of Daat, four colors are made in her, HB HG.
Tifferet is called Hassadim, as it is considered light of Hassadim. Malchut is called Gevurot, as she is the Masach. Thus, the voice, ZON and Daat, include all the colors, for without him these four colors would not be. He also includes all the letters, since ZON himself is called “letters.” And because he complemented the four colors to Bina, he takes into his letters all those four colors HB HG. It follows that the ZON includes all the letters and colors. Afterwards ZON come out of the palace of Bina and come to their own place.
Thus, the three kinds of brightness have been clarified: the brightness of Beresheet, Taamim, the hidden brightness, Nekudot, the brightness that includes Otiot.
Those three kinds of brightness are HBD, as it is written, “I will be that which I will be,” “The Lord our God, the Lord,” and “In the beginning God created,” since AA and upper AVI are the brightness of Beresheet, Taamim, from whom all the Mochin of Hochma and Hassadim are extended. They are also the first EKYEH , Hochma, the first HaVaYaH. Bina, YESHSUT, is a hidden brightness, “created,” Asher, “Our God,” and the three points—Holam, Shuruk, and Hirik. The ZON is brightness that includes all the Otiot and colors, the last EKYEH, Daat, the last HaVaYaH, Elokim in “In the beginning God created.” It is so because through the third brightness, the name Elokim was completed in Bina, and when the ZON exit Bina and come to their own place, they are called “The heaven and the earth,” Otiot.
Know that all the Mochin are included in the Taamim, which are the first brightness of Beresheet, AA and upper AVI, since they take the Bina out in a hidden brightness in the three points—Holam, Shuruk, Hirik. Also, the Zivug that is done on the point of Hirik, Masach de ZON extends from the level of Hassadim of upper AVI, Taamim. Hence, the Taamim consist of three Behinot, called “upper,” “middle,” and “lower.”
Upper Taamim, like Pashta Revi’i which is above the letters are considered AVI themselves.
The middle Taamim, comma and dash, which come inside the letters, are Hitkalelut of YESHSUT in AVI, the elicitation of Bina in three sowings. A comma is Hitkalelut with the point of Holam, the taking out of Bina, who remains in MI, and the letters ELEH descend to ZON, which is why it is called Psik , for it Posek  the degree of Bina into two halves, MI and ELEH.
A dash is Hitkalelut with the point of Shuruk, when the Taamim illuminate and return ELEH to Bina, by which the point of Shuruk in Bina is made.
The lower Taamim, below the letters, such as Tvir and Etnachta, are Hitkalelut with the Hirik, through the ZON that were drawn with ELEH upon their return to Bina. The Zivug, too, done on the Masach de ZON, extends from the lower Taamim.
This is why “The educated will shine” are Otiot and Nekudot, ZON and YESHSUT, and illuminate with all three Behinot Taamim—upper, middle, and lower:
As the brightness, the melodies of the Taamim, the upper Taamim above the letters.
The firmament is the Taamim that expand in the expansion of the melody. They are lower Taamim, below the letters, the level of Hassadim for clothing of Hochma, at which time the Mochin spread to the lower ones in their entire wholeness.
“Those who lead the many to righteousness” are those ceasing Taamim, comma and dash, which stop the melody as they journey. These are the middle Taamim inside the letters, since the comma and dash are inside the line, which is Hitkalelut of the three sowings in them. This is why the word is heard, when the Mochin are heard and dispensed upon the lower ones.
Once he has clarified the three kinds of Taamim in the verse, “As the brightness of the firmament, and those who lead the many to righteousness,” who give the Mochin de YESHSUT and ZON to all their Behinot, he explains once more the essence of the Mochin of YESHSUT and ZON. He says that the Otiot and the Nekudot, ZON and YESHSUT, illuminate as one in their journeys in concealment, since out of the act of concealing of the middle Taamim, comma and dash, the ZON acquire the power to illuminate with YESHSUT as one.
It is so because through the comma, the letters ELEH of YESHSUT descend to ZON and cling to them in their place into a single degree. Therefore, when the dash returns the letters ELEH to the degree of YESHSUT, the ZON rise with them to the place of YESHSUT and illuminate with them as one. This is why it was said, “Will shine,” the letters and the points that illuminate as one in the journeys in concealment, in the journey in those hidden paths. It is so because all those great Mochin come out in the three sowings of Holam, Shuruk, Hirik, which are hidden paths, for were it not for those three sowings, it is inconceivable that ZON and the lower ones would obtain Mochin.
Everything expanded from all the Mochin in the ZON and the worlds emerging in the three paths. But know that these three parts of the brightness that we said in the Taamim, AVI—the brightness, the firmament, and those who lead the many to righteousness—are only transference in AVI, and bestowal upon YESHSUT and ZON, and not at all for themselves, since AVI are always in pure Avir, called light, or Avir, but not “brightness.”
“The educated will shine” for the pillars and foundations of that palanquin. The educated themselves are the upper pillars and foundations, who observe with wisdom to bestow all that the palanquin needs, and what it’s foundations need. Pillars are HGT, and the foundations are NHY, since the brightness is the illumination of Hochma. That brightness is received only in the pillars and foundations of the Nukva de ZA, who is called “palanquin,” and not at all the degrees above her.
The educated themselves are the upper pillars and foundations, the Sefirot from Chazeh de ZA and above, which themselves do not receive anything from that brightness, which is Hochma, since they receive only light of Hassadim to give all that is needed to the Nukva, who is called a “palanquin.” She needs illumination of Hochma, and they receive that brightness for her needs, although they do not need it.
This is why they look with wisdom to give all that the palanquin needs, for although they themselves do not need that brightness, they still receive it for the palanquin, since the palanquin is completed only in that light of Hochma. This is implied in the verse, “Happy is he who educates the poor.” The one who educates is ZA, the poor is his Nukva. He receives the brightness for the poor who needs it.
“Will shine” are the upper VAK de ZA, since if they do not shine or illuminate, then they will not be able to examine and look upon that palanquin, to correct it in all that is needed. If they did not have the need to correct the palanquin, they would not receive that shining light at all because for themselves, they receive only light of Hassadim, like GAR de Bina.
16) They illuminate like the brightness of that firmament that stands over those educated ones, of which it is written, “And an image over the heads of the animal, a firmament such as the terrible ice.” This is the firmament of YESHSUT, where that brightness of the firmament illuminates to ZA in general, called Torah. It also illuminates to the heads of that animal, called “palanquin,” meaning illuminates to the pillars and foundations from Chazeh de ZA and above, which are the heads that give illumination of Hochma, called “brightness,” to the palanquin.
Those heads—which are the pillars and foundations, upper AVI, called “educated”—always shine, incessantly. They look toward that firmament to receive the light that comes out of there.
There are two kinds of light in that firmament: 1) illumination of Hochma, called “brightness,” 2) light of Hassadim in the form of pure Avir of upper AVI, whose Zivug never stops.
But the first light, called “brightness,” is a Zivug that stops and does not always illuminate. And although the educated receive illumination of Hochma from the firmament to give to the palanquin, and their Zivug had to be intermittent, so they do not always illuminate, it is still not so. Rather, they always illuminate in a never ending Zivug because they receive the light of the pure Avir, whose Zivug never stops. In respect to that light, they always illuminate.
He says that they look toward that firmament to receive the light that comes out of there. But he is not saying, “That brightness that comes out of there,” indicating the second light, included in the firmament, which is called “light” and not “brightness.” This, too, is a light of ZA in general, called Torah, who always illuminates, incessantly. That is, ZA in general does not receive the brightness for himself, but only that light which does not stop.
And the Land Was Tohu 
17) “And the land was Tohu ve Bohu .” The word “was” points to previously, when she was snow inside water and the filth came out of her by the forming of the snow in the water. The verse, “In the beginning,” already speaks of the correction of heaven and earth, as it is written, “The educated will shine.” Why does he return here to speaking of Tohu and Bohu in the verse, “And the land was Tohu ve Bohu ,” since these Behinot were in the earth only prior to the correction?
The text actually wishes to tell us what existed prior to the corrections, clarified in the verse, “In the beginning...” that first there was snow inside the water. In the beginning, when He wished to create the worlds, the Tzimtzum of the upper light came out, which is called “carving.” Subsequently, a Masach was established for Zivug de Hakaa, to raise Ohr Hozer, called “a fountain.” Those two Behinot existed in Midat ha Din.
After that He associated Midat ha Rachamim with it, elevating Malchut to Bina, and making the second Tzimtzum in the place of Bina, who is Rachamim. Then the Masach for the Zivug was established there and emanated AA de Atzilut, as well as all the worlds, in Midat ha Rachamim. It follows that two Behinot came out in Midat ha Din—Tzimtzum and Masach—and two Behinot Tzimtzum and Masach in Midat ha Rachamim.
The order in all the sorts that were done in the world of correction after the breaking of the vessels is that each Sefira from the seven kings who died that was sorted first undergoes Tzimtzum Aleph, carving, and the correction of the Masach, the fountain, and then Tzimtzum Bet is executed on it, in association of Midat ha Rachamim in Din, and a Masach is established there in the fountain.
There are four Behinot: Tzimtzum Aleph and a Masach, and Tzimtzum Bet and a Masach. But here it concerns the sorting of Malchut de Atzilut, called “earth,” who went through those four Behinot through her complete correction. In her, they are called:
Tohu, Tzimtzum Aleph;
Bohu, the Masach in Tzimtzum Aleph;
Darkness, Tzimtzum Bet;
The spirit of God, the Masach in Tzimtzum Bet.
The root of Malchut is in the lower water. When she underwent Tzimtzum Aleph, the water became snow, as it is written, “He says to the snow, ‘Be earth,’” for previously it was snow inside water because the first form of correction that she underwent was her forming into snow, which is the force of Tzimtzum Aleph, when filth came out of her by that force, in the forming of the snow in the water. Since the water froze and became snow, filth came out in her, since every deficiency is regarded as filth, waste and Klipot. But in the beginning of the forming of the deficiency, before it was apparent as a lack of something, it was regarded as filth, the letters of “This, what is it?” . It is so because there is some transformation, but it is still not regarded as a deficiency. And when the deficiency appears, it is called “waste” and Klipa.
Therefore, in her forming into snow, it was still not apparent as a deficiency in the water, but only as filth. Afterwards a strong fire struck her and waste was formed in her, and she was impregnated and became Tohu. A strong force of Din struck her, called “a strong fire,” turning the filth into waste. She was impregnated with the waste and it became Tohu. He says “impregnated” because the word Ibur  indicates that the form is not apparent unless by a delaying and repeating the action many times until it is completed.
So it is here: the filth did not become waste right at the first striking of the strong fire. Rather, that striking repeated itself many times until it was activated and became Tohu. She was impregnated and became Tohu because through the impregnation she became Tohu and where she was first only filth, now she has become a nest of waste, called Tohu.
Four actions took place until she became Tohu: 1) the light turned to water, 2) the water to snow, 3) the snow to waste, by the striking of fire, and 4) the delay until the waste is apparent and can be called Tohu.
Bohu is a scrutiny that emerged and was sorted out of the waste, and corrected in her. That sorting is a Masach, since afterwards the waste is established into a Masach in Malchut, delaying the upper light from spreading through it downward, and repelling the upper light back, like sunlight that strikes a lantern, reflected back due to the thickness of the lantern. That Ohr Hozer became the clothing of the upper light, called a “fountain.”
It is a scrutiny that came out and was sorted out of the waste and settled in her, since out of that waste, a Masach was made, which repels and reflects the upper light, so it does not traverse from it downward. And that part of the light that returns from it and up became a clothing over the upper light, so it became a Kli and a receptacle over the upper light.
It is called “a scrutiny” because through it, the waste is sorted into a good and important virtue. Were it not for the waste, the Masach would not have been made, and there would not be a Kli for a receptacle for the upper light. It settled in her, permanently established in her, so that she serves as a fountain and a receptacle for the light.
Darkness is strong fire. That darkness covers the Tohu over that waste, and is made out of her. That is, darkness does not mean merely absence of light, meaning emptiness. Rather, it is regarded as affecting emptiness, like a strong fire that burns and consumes every entity that it touches, leaving an empty place in its stead. This is why darkness is a strong fire that burns and consumes everything, consuming and terminating the light in its place, and that darkness covers over that Tohu.
It is called “darkness” and not “fire” because the power of the burning in it is not from itself, but because it is staying over the waste, which is called Tohu, receiving from it. This is the association of Midat ha Din with Rachamim, when Malchut rose to Bina to be established there with the Masach in her. And because there are no Din or fire in Bina, so that Malchut can be established with a Masach, as the Bohu was established, that darkness stays over the Tohu, where there is the strong fire, turning the filth into waste and Tohu, and from there the darkness receives the force of a burning fire, like the strong fire in Tohu.
That darkness covers the Tohu over that waste and is established out of it because it receives from the Tohu that force of a strong and burning fire. This is why it is called Tzimtzum Bet , for it is not a new force, but rather receives force from Tzimtzum Aleph. There is no innovation here, except that she rose to the place of Rachamim, and that Tzimtzum in Malchut took place in the place of Rachamim, Bina. This is why it is called Tzimtzum Bet.
18) And the spirit of God” means the spirit of holiness that emerges from the living God, since once the Masach in Malchut was established in terms of the darkness, which is Tzimtzum Bet in the place of Bina, a Zivug de Hakaa came out on that Masach, and extended a new level of VAK, the level Ruach, which extends from the living God, Bina, since now Malchut is in the place of Bina.
“Hovering over the face of the water.” After the wind blew, one fineness was sorted out from that waste, like the flying of filth. And once that wind  blew, which is the level of Ruach that was clothed by the Ohr Hozer of the Masach, called “darkness,” which is the spirit of the living God, by that the force of Tohu in the Masach was sorted into very fine waste, like the floating of filth, meaning only sufficiently to detain the upper light to raise Ohr Hozer.
But when the Masach was in Malchut’s place, the Tohu was recognized there as thick waste, in a way that afterwards he sorted, wrapped, and refined once, and twice, until that filth in which there is no filth at all was found. It is so because initially the Masach of darkness was only fine waste, afterwards, when the level of the first light, the level of Nefesh, came out on it, and then the second level, Ruach, all the remaining filth had been purified out of there, and she could receive the level of Gadlut, as it is written, “And there was light.”
“Sorted” means that he was sorted for a correction of the Masach. He raises Ohr Hozer, covers, wraps, and clothes the upper light. The Ohr Hozer raises wings and clothes the Ohr Yashar. It was purified because the lights purify and suck out the waste in the Masach, until the Masach descends to its place, and the level of light of Gadlut comes out on it.
Thus, the four Behinot under which Malchut, earth, went, have been clarified, until she was set up to receive the Gadlut, as it is written, “And there was light.”
Snow, which became waste, called Tohu;
The Masach that was established, and the level of light that was drawn on the Masach, which is called Bohu;
Tzimtzum Bet in the place of Rachamim, Bina, which is called “darkness”;
The level of NR that came out on the Masach of darkness, Ruach, called “the spirit of God.”
Afterwards, it is written, “And God said, ‘Let there be light,’” the level of Gadlut.
19) When the Tohu was sorted and purified, a great and strong spirit came out of it, as it is written, “And, behold, the Lord passed by, and a great and strong wind rent mountains and broke rocks before the Lord, not with the spirit of the Lord.” He explains the four Behinot in the four visions that Elijah saw. He says that when Tohu was sorted and refined in the Ibur, in the filth of the ice, and she was impregnated and became Tohu, a great and strong wind came out of him, renting mountains and breaking rocks, which Elijah saw.
The Bohu was sorted and refined, and a quake came out of him, as it is written, “And after the wind, a quake; the Lord was not in the quake.” This is so because when the Bohu was sorted into a Masach, the force of Din in it had already been diminished, and no longer rented mountains or broke rocks. Rather, only a quake was discerned in it.
And when the darkness was sorted, fire was included in it, since when the Masach rose and was established in Bina, the darkness was included in the fire of Tohu, and the force of the Din of the quake diminished and remained only in fire, as it is written, “And after the quake, a fire; the Lord was not in the fire.”
Afterwards the Ruach  was sorted, and a sound of fine silence was included in it, as it is written, “And after the fire, the sound of fine silence.” It is so because when the Masach of darkness received the level of Ruach, the force of Din in it had already diminished into a sound of fine silence, sorted into very fine waste. This is the sound of fine silence that is written in Elijah.
Thus, the four visions that Elijah saw have been clarified—the discernments of Tohu, Bohu, darkness, and wind —as it is written, “And the earth was Tohu and Bohu, and darkness over the face of the deep, and the spirit of God hovering over the face of the water.” Tohu is a great and strong wind, renting mountains and breaking rocks; Bohu is a quake; darkness is fire; and wind is the sound of fine silence.
20) Tohu is a place in which there are no colors and no forms, and it is not included in a form at all. Once he clarified the four Behinot—Tohu, Bohu, darkness, and wind—in general, he explains them in particular. He says that neither color nor form can be perceived in Tohu, since Tohu is Tzimtzum Aleph. Bohu is the Masach that was established for a Zivug. And when Tzimtzum Aleph came out, it was a raw discernment, and no form or color were apparent yet. Hence, in Tohu, which extends from Tzimtzum Aleph, there are also no color or form, since it, too, is a raw discernment.
A color is the difference between the degrees that come out on the four Behinot of Aviut in the Masach, HB TM. The form is the form of the Din itself, which was still in a raw form and was not included in a form, since even the form of the Din that emerged from it after the Masach was established—the fountain, called Bohu—even that form was not included in the raw form of the Tohu.
Now it has a form, and when examined, it has no form at all. Yet, it cannot be said that the form of the Din was not apparent whatsoever in Tohu, since it was already said that she is filth that became waste by the striking of the strong fire. However, it means that it was not subject to observation and recognition, since for a moment, the form of waste is seen, and when turning to see that form again, he no longer sees it or finds it, and he looks toward its place and it is gone. This is why it was said that now it is with a form, and when examined, it has no form at all.
Everyone has a clothing to wear, besides Tohu. This is because it is the nature of spiritual things that each cause dresses in its result, which it sustains. And if the result becomes a cause for another result, it also dresses in it, and gives it the power of sustenance, and so forth. Thus, if some cause were to be cancelled, all the results that have cascaded from it would have been lost at once. This is considered clothing, when each cause dresses in its result, to sustain it.
Also, everyone has a clothing to wear, besides Tohu, since upper and lower clothe in one another, each cause in the result, except for Tohu, who has no clothing because it does not dress in its lower one, which is caused by it. Rather, it stands alone without any connection with the others, which are caused by it.
21) Bohu already has a depiction and a form, which is the stones immersed in the carving of the Tohu. It is so because Bohu is the Masach that was established in Malchut for Zivug de Hakaa, and the force of Din that appeared in Malchut with the correction of the Masach is called “stones,” as it is as hard as a rock, in relation to the upper light, and will not let it move to the Kli of Malchut.
That shape has not appeared in Tohu yet, but only in Bohu, since first, in the carving of Tohu, which is the Tzimtzum of the light, the light departed from all ten Sefirot and the force of Din was not apparent in Malchut more than in the rest of the Sefirot, since the light departed equally from all of them.
But afterwards, in the correction of Bohu, which is the Masach that was established in Malchut, making a Zivug de Hakaa with the upper light, not letting it come into Malchut and extending the light only through the upper nine Sefirot, the force of Din appeared in Malchut since she remained without Ohr Yashar. It follows that Malchut still remained immersed in the carving of the Tohu, the Tzimtzum. Thus, in Tohu there was still no form of Din. Rather, only after the correction of the Bohu was the form of Din revealed, meaning the form of the stones immersed inside the carving of the Tohu, which is an empty space without light.
The stones come out inside the carving where they are immersed, and from there draw benefit to the world in a depiction of clothing. Now he explains the depiction that was made. Those stones are the force of Din in the Masach. They emerged and were established inside the carving in Malchut. They draw lights for the benefit of the world in a depiction of clothing—drawing Ohr Yashar—and through beating, they raise Ohr Hozer that clothes the Ohr Yashar in a depiction of clothing. They draw Ohr Yashar for the benefit of the world from above downward, and raise Ohr Hozer from below upward, clothing the Ohr Yashar, and this is called by the name, “depiction.”
22) The stones are punctured and moist. Stones in caves from which the water is constantly flowing—as though from a spring—are called “moist stones,” since they are lying on a spring and block it. For this reason, the water comes out through the holes in those stones, constantly dripping through their faces. Those stones, which are called Bohu, are also punctured and moist, as they are established with a Masach that raises Ohr Hozer, like moist stones that always extract water from themselves.
Bohu means moist stones, which are strong rocks. They are called “moist stones” because water is coming out of them. This is why above, The Zohar called the Masach, “a fountain.”
These stones hang in the air because when Bohu is not established with a Masach for Zivug de Hakaa, the stones are regarded as descending and sinking in the carving of the Tohu, which is the Tzimtzum and the force of the Din. However, the Bohu here is corrected with a Zivug de Hakaa, and is therefore regarded as raised above the carving of the Tohu, and is in the air, in light of Hassadim. This is so because although Malchut cannot receive the Ohr Yashar, she can receive Ohr Hozer, and that Ohr Hozer raises her to the air.
The moist stones, which are the Malchut that is corrected with a Masach, rose from the sinking of the Tohu and were hung in the air, emerging from the darkness and receiving light of Hassadim. It was said in The Book of Creation, “Ten and not nine.” Do not think that because of the Tzimtzum and the Masach established in Malchut, Malchut was left completely emptied of light, and is not included in the ten Sefirot. It is not so because she receives her illumination from Ohr Hozer that she raises from below upward. That Ohr Hozer also extends in to Malchut because Ohr Hozer is light of Hassadim, on which there was no Tzimtzum. This is why Malchut, too, is regarded as a complete Sefira like the first nine. Hence, they are ten and not nine.
Sometimes the moist stones are hanging in the air because they rise from there, from the carving of the Tohu. And sometimes, on a cloudy day, they hide and raise water from the deep, to nourish Tohu with them.
Commentary: When the lower ones are worthy and engage in Torah and good deeds to raise MAN, they correct the Malchut with a Masach and a Zivug de Hakaa. She extends Ohr Yashar from above downward and clothes the Ohr Yashar with her Ohr Hozer from below upward. At that time Bohu, the moist stones, are hanging in the air because they ascend from there upward, since the Ohr Hozer that the moist stones raise elevates them from the carving of Tohu and lifts them in the air, light of Hassadim.
However, when the lower ones corrupt their works, the correction of the Masach that was made on Malchut is corrupted and she is unfit for a Zivug de Hakaa with the upper light. Then it is considered that the light departed and became like a cloudy day, when the sun is not shining. Then the moist stones disappear once more inside the carving of the Tohu, Malchut descends to the carving of Tohu and hides on the cloudy day, eliciting water out of the deep, which are Dinim, and sustains the Tohu with those waters. She strengthens the Tohu when she fears his Gevurot. By that, the lower ones repent and improve their works. This is, “And God made it that He would be feared.”
At that time there is joy and there is folly, since the Tohu has spread in the world. On the one hand there is joy, by which the lower ones repent and the Mochin are drawn, and there is joy in the worlds. But on the other hand there is folly because the Tohu had spread in the world, and the spirit of folly multiplies, the spirit of Klipot and Dinim, by the expansion of the Tohu.
23) Darkness is the black fire that is strong in color. It is so because no color can rule and change the black color. It is red fire, which is strong in sight, since the red color is more conspicuous to the eye than all the colors. It is also a green fire, strong in depiction because the perfection of every depiction is by the green color. It is also a white fire, the root color of all the colors.
Once The Zohar explained Tohu and Bohu, it explains darkness. There are several appellations to the ten Sefirot, HB TM. Their names change according to their matter and according to their action. In regard to the Yesodot , the Sefirot are called HB TM—water, fire, wind, and dust. In regard to the Masach and the Malchuts in the Sefirot, the HB TM are called four colors: white, red, green, and black. In regard to the relation of the rest of the Sefirot to the colors that come from the Malchuts, they are called HB TM—inclusive, a sight, a depiction, and color.
You should also know that as a whole, Tzimtzum Aleph is ascribed to the Sefira Hochma, and Tzimtzum Bet to the Sefira Bina because Tzimtzum Bet rose only up to the place of Bina, and not at all to the Hochma above her. Hence, the Hochma remained in Tzimtzum Aleph, and in that regard, Yesod of the Sefira Hochma is considered water, implying that there are no Tzimtzum and Din there. Yesod of the Sefira Bina is considered fire, from which all the Dinim awaken. Therefore, The Zohar explains the Tohu, which is water and snow, in relation to its being Tzimtzum Aleph, and The Zohar explains the darkness—which is Tzimtzum Bet—as fire, as it is ascribed to Bina, fire. It is therefore clarified why darkness is regarded as fire.
And now we shall explain the HB TM called “four colors,” and the HB TM called “inclusive,” “sight,” “depiction,” and “color.” The colors come from the Masach in Malchut, from the Zivug de Hakaa in her, which raises ten Sefirot HB TM from below upward, called Rosh, and ten Sefirot HB TM from above downward, called Guf, which were painted in colors below. Only in the ten Sefirot from above downward, called Guf, did the four colors HB TM come out, and not in the ten Sefirot de Rosh, since the colors come from Malchut. And since she is the reason for the HB TM de Guf, they were painted in colors. But in the Rosh, which is below it, the Din cannot rise above the place where it is present.
Hence, HB TM of the ten Sefirot de Rosh are called “inclusive,” “sight,” “depiction,” and “color.” The Hochma is only the inclusive and root. It does not even contain the sight of the colors. In Bina, there is a sight, in Tifferet, there is a depiction, which is closer to a color, but a real color exists only in Malchut of the Rosh, since because color is Din, it cannot rise above its place.
These four Behinot in HB TM de Rosh show their power and dominion also in the four colors—white, red, green, and black—in HB TM de Guf. This is why darkness is black fire, which is strong in color, since Malchut de Guf is regarded as a black color, and her special force extends to her in HB TM de Rosh. This is why her governance in color is strong, for she does not suffer any changes by the rest of the colors.
The red fire is strong in sight, meaning the Bina de Guf in the red color. Her governance is great in the sight that she receives from HB TM de Rosh. A green fire is strong in depiction, Tifferet de Guf, which is in the color green. Her governance is great in the depiction received from HB TM de Rosh. White fire is the root color of all the colors, the Hochma de Guf in the white color. It contains all of them because it receives governance from HB TM de Rosh, and becomes the root of all the colors in the Guf, as well.
Darkness is strong in all the kinds of fire. It attacks the Tohu because it includes the power of Din of all four fires in Bina. This is why the darkness attacks and overcomes the Malchut of the Tohu, as it removes the power of Din of Tohu from Malchut, and mitigates her with Midat ha Rachamim in her, since initially the Bina absorbs the Malchut of Tohu into her, and then that Malchut becomes Midat ha Rachamim in her. “Attacks” means that he fights with it in order to subdue it. It attacks the Tohu, meaning overcomes the Tohu and removes the power of Din from it.
Darkness is fire that carries four colors. It is not black fire, but only when it attacks the Tohu, since darkness is actually Bina, who is called “fire.” HB TM in her are clothed in the four colors—white, red, green, and black—which are not black fire. It is called “darkness” which means black fire. It is called so only during its act of attacking the Tohu, mitigating it with Midat ha Rachamim in it.
It is written, “And his eyes were dim, so he could not see, and he called Esau,” since Isaac is Bina, and since the patriarchs are HBD. When he wished to subdue Esau, he had to partake with the Malchut, and by that his eyes were dimmed, for Bina herself was diminished due to her participation with Malchut in a black fire. Then he called Esau, the power of Din in the Tohu, to subdue him under the Kedusha. Thus, during Bina’s action to subdue the Tohu, she is regarded as black fire.
The face of the evil is darkness. Isaac, who welcomed the evil, Esau, was called “darkness” then, for he was on him to attack him. The text explains, “And his eyes were dim,” since Isaac welcomed Esau, who is bad, hence the face of an evil one, which is darkness, had jumped on him. He welcomed Esau because he was on him to attack him, for by being on him, he was attacking and subduing him. And because he was on the evil at that time, he was called “darkness.” This is an evidence that Bina is called “darkness” only when she acts to mitigate the power of Din of Tohu from Malchut, for then she is necessarily on the Tohu to subdue it. And because of that, she is darkened and becomes a black fire.
24) “And the spirit of God.” The spirit  is a voice over Bohu, attacking it, and leading it in all that is needed. This is because the correction of the Masach in Tzimtzum Bet is called Ruach , since that Masach raises Ohr Hozer and extends the level of ten Sefirot in the light of the level of Ruach. And because it comes from Bina, called Elokim, this level—that emerged on that Masach—is called “The spirit of Elokim ,” since it is the spirit of holiness that comes out of the living God, Bina. And that level of Ruach is discerned as the light of ZA because Ruach is ZA, and is called “a voice.”
Ruach is a voice over Bohu, since there is Tzimtzum Bet here, called “darkness,” and a Masach, called Ruach. Tzimtzum Aleph is called Tohu, and the Masach is called Bohu. Hence, Tzimtzum Bet, darkness, is on the Tohu, attacking it and subduing it, and the Masach de Tzimtzum Bet, Ruach, is on the Masach de Tzimtzum Aleph, Bohu, attacking it to include it within it so it can extend the spirit of the living God from Bina.
This is why Ruach is a voice, the level of ZA, which extends from the living God, called a “voice,” which is over Bohu, riding on the Masach de Tzimtzum Aleph, called Bohu. And the Ruach attacks it and controls it to lead it in all that is required, meaning so he can extend on it all the Mochin that is needed. Initially, it extends on it the level of spirit of life from Bina, and then GAR from Bina, as it is written, “And there was light.”
And the more the power of the Masach of Bohu controls, it cannot extend anything from Bina. This is so because each Behina receives only from its corresponding Behina, and nothing from above its Behina. Hence, as long as the force of the Masach de Bohu controls Malchut, which is her own Behina, Malchut will not be able to receive anything from Bina.
But once she has obtained the force of the Masach de Tzimtzum Bet, Ruach—which comes from the Malchut that was included in Bina herself, and therefore became like Bina herself, and could therefore receive from Bina because by that she became precisely like her corresponding Behina—for this reason, the Masach de Ruach is over the Masach de Bohu, attacking it in order to revoke it, to be able to extend all that is needed to Malchut, which are VAK and Mochin from Bina, since there is no correction for Malchut except by the Mochin de Bina.
The stones are immersed inside the deeps from which the water stems. This is why they are called “The face of the waters.” Commentary: The correction of the Masach in Malchut is called “stones” because through it, Malchut becomes fossilized, not receiving the upper light into her. By that, the Zivug de Hakaa is carried out on her. And because the Masach is immersed and established inside the deeps in Malchut, for through the Zivug de Hakaa the water comes out of there, it is therefore written, “And the spirit of God hovered over the face of the waters,” since the stones, the Masach, are called “The face of the waters,” because the water, the Mochin, comes out of their Zivug.
With the Masach de Tzimtzum Aleph, called Bohu, the stones that are immersed inside the carving of the Tohu come out inside the carving where they are immersed. And here in the Masach de Ruach, the stones are immersed inside the deeps from which the water comes out. We should understand the difference between the carving of the Tohu and inside the deeps. Tzimtzum Aleph is called Tohu, and not “a deep.” But Tzimtzum Bet is called “a deep,” as it is written, “And darkness over the face of the deep,” meaning only the outlet of the water, since the Tohu in it has already been mitigated along with his ascent to Bina, and only the outlet of water remains of it.
Ruach is a voice that is over the Bohu, as it is written, “The voice of the Lord is upon the waters,” and as it is written, “And the spirit of God hovered over the face of the waters.” He tells us that the Masach de Tzimtzum Bet, called “the spirit of God” does not contain the carving of the Tohu—like the Masach de Bohu—because it is on Bohu, attacking it, and controlling it, to lead it. Hence, there is only Tzimtzum Bet in it, called “a deep,” the outlet of the water, an outlet for Mochin, since the force of Din de Tohu has moved away from there.
This is why he calls it “water,” as it is written, “And the spirit of God hovered over the face of the waters.” It is so because the stones are immersed in the deeps from which the water comes out, since Malchut was not fossilized, to not receive light, due to the strength of the Din of the carving of Tohu. Rather, she became fossilized so as to not receive the light and repel it with a Zivug de Hakaa, only in order to elicit water, to extend the level of light from above downward, and clothe it with her Ohr Hozer from below upward. This is why she is called “The face of the waters,” since the Tzimtzum is called “the face of the deep,” as it is written, “And darkness over the face of the deep.”
The Masach is called “The face of the waters” because both the Tzimtzum and the Masach did not come here because of a Din, but to elicit water, since the Ruach led and attacked that face, called “The face of the deep.” The level of Ruach, which came out on the Masach, led and sustained the face of the face of the deep. It also attacked the face of the deep, since first, it led and sustained the face of the deep to elicit water with a Zivug de Hakaa, and later attacked it to completely revoke it, until that filth in which there is no filth at all was found. This is when it wishes to extend Mochin de GAR, as it is written, “Let there be light.”
Ruach led and attacked that face, called “The face of the deep”—one according to what it needs, and the other according to what it needs, for when it needs the level of Hassadim from Bina, which is water, it leads and sustains the face of the deep, and when it needs to extend Mochin de GAR, it temporarily revokes it so it can extend Mochin de GAR from Bina.
25) The name Shadai is over Tohu—the boundary and the conclusion of the expansion of the light. He said to His world Dai , and it will not spread further. And since the earth, Malchut, is Tohu, the name Shadai is on it, as a boundary and conclusion of the light. It is so because the light could not spread into it due to the Tzimtzum that rides on it. It follows that the light ended above it, making an end over it—the name Shadai.
The name “hosts” is on Bohu. The Sium  of each Partzuf in Masach de Yesod is called “hosts” because it implies the Zivug that is done only on that Masach. From there, all the hosts of the Lord are born and emerge. And since Bohu is a correction of the Masach with a Zivug, it follows that Malchut acquired the Yesod, hosts.
The name Elokim is on darkness, since darkness is Tzimtzum Bet, the ascent of Malchut to Bina, and Bina is called Elokim. It follows that the earth, Malchut, which was included in darkness, obtained by that the name Elokim from Bina.
The name HaVaYaH is on wind , since Ruach is a correction of the Masach de Tzimtzum Bet in Malchut, who extended the level of ZA, called “voice,” from Bina. The wind is a voice over Bohu, leading it in all that is needed.
It is so because Malchut was unfit for Mochin de GAR, for HaVaYaH, from the Masach de Bohu because the force of the Din from the carving of Tohu is on it. But once she obtained a Masach from Bina—regarding the stones that are immersed in the deeps, from which the water comes out, which means that there is no Din in the Masach, but the Masach was fossilized to detain the upper light, to make a Zivug de Hakaa, to extend the level of Hassadim from Bina—Malchut can now receive Mochin de GAR, as well, HaVaYaH, as it is written, “Let there be light,” the name HaVaYaH. This is why it was said that the name HaVaYaH is on the Ruach.
26) It is written, “A great and strong wind rent mountains, not with the spirit  of the Lord.” The name HaVaYaH is not in the wind because a strong wind comes out of Tohu, as only in Tohu is the name Shadai over him. It is likewise with the quake that comes out of Bohu. It is written, “The Lord was not in the quake,” only the name “hosts” is on him.
Also, in the fire that comes out of the darkness, it is written, “The Lord was not in the fire,” since only the name Elokim is on her. But in a sound of fine silence, which comes from the spirit of God, on which there is the name HaVaYaH, it is written, “And it came to pass that when Elijah heard it, he wrapped his face in his mantle and went outside, and stood at the entrance to the cave. And behold, there came a voice unto him, and said, ‘Why are you here, Elijah?’” It follows that the first three Behinot did not come out of the cave. But when he heard the sound of fine silence, he promptly went out of the cave and welcomed the Lord, for here was the name HaVaYaH, and he knew that HaVaYaH was speaking to him.
27) There are four joints in the name HaVaYaH, four letters that imply joints in a man’s body, as well as the organs, which are 4 and 12. Here is the matter of the 12 letter name that was given to Elijah in the cave, three Havayot , in each of which are four letters, hence they are 12. And the name “Twelve” is also implied in a man’s body, since there are three Havayot in him: 1) in Rosh, HBD, 2) in the Guf, through the Tabur, HGT, and 3) from Tabur and below, NHY.
They are in it at the point of Segol: HB on the right and left, and Daat in the middle, HG on the right and left, and Tifferet in the middle, NH on the right and the left, and Yesod in the middle.
The three middle Sefirot—Daat, Tifferet, Yesod—are each discerned with two Behinot, male and female. This is why there are three parts in a man’s body—Rosh, Guf, and Raglaim . And in each part there are four organs: the four organs of the Rosh, HBD, where HB are Yod-Hey, and Daat is Vav-Hey. There are also four organs in the Guf. HG are Yod-Hey, Tifferet is Vav-Hey. And likewise, there are four organs in the Raglaim: NH are Yod-Hey, and Yesod and Atara are Vav-Hey. This is the 12 letter name implied in a man’s body.
Let There Be Light
28) “And God said, ‘Let there be light,’ and there was light.” This is the beginning to finding the secrets to how the world was created in particular. Thus far, the creation of the world was mentioned in general, in the verse, “In the beginning God created.” Afterwards the general returned to being general, and particular, and general.
Commentary: First, the creation of the world is mentioned in general, in the first verse, “In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.” No details were mentioned regarding how the heaven and the earth were created. Yet, afterwards all the details of the work of creation were mentioned, from the first utterance, “Let there be light,” through the verse, “And God saw all that He has made, and behold, it was very good. And the heaven and the earth were finished.” Thus, now the general, the first verse, was made into general, and particular, and general, since the verse, “In the beginning,” is the first general, and from the words, “Let there be light,” onward, they are the particular, and the words, “And  saw” is the last general.
29) Thus far, everything was hanging in the air, which is poured down from Ein Sof. Yet, we could ask, But it is already written, “And the earth was Tohu va Bohu ,” which is the particular of creation, and not the general. And this is why he says that thus far it was all hanging in the air, for there was only the level of Avir  in the world, ZA, the light of NR in Kelim of KH, as it is written, “And the spirit of God hovered over the face of the water.” Thus, this is still not regarded as creating the world in particular, for GAR is missing. Rather, it is considered that creation is still included in Ein Sof, that it did not become disclosed yet.
When the force spread through the upper palace, who is Elokim, an utterance is written in regard to him, “And God said.” The upper palace, YESHSUT, is the second palace of AA. First, the palace came out of Rosh de AA, which is Asher, a Rosh that went out of Resheet, and YESHSUT is the name Elokim, where five letters are KHB TM. And when he departed Rosh de AA, only two letters MI of Elokim remained in him, the level of Avir in Kelim of KH, which are MI. Then the name Elokim did not illuminate in the palace, for it missed the letters ELEH of Elokim. Subsequently, through a higher illumination, the three letters ELEH were brought back to YESHSUT, and the name Elokim was completed once more, illuminated in the palace, and the level of GAR emerged in it.
When the force spread through the upper palace, the three letters ELEH returned to the palace, Elokim, which is the completion of the five letters of Elokim. An utterance is written in it. The word, “And  said” is written in it, which means a Zivug for bestowing GAR. This is the first particular of the creation of the world, since previously, the word, “And  said,” which is particular, was not written. And although the verse, Beresheet, is also an utterance, which complements the ten utterances in the work of creation, “And  said” is not written in it, for it is a general. “And  said” is a particular. Thus, the words, “And God said, ‘Let there be light,’” is the beginning of the particulars  in the creation of the world.
30) “And  said” is poised for a question and for knowing. It is so because “And  said” has the letters of MI Ohr , which indicate a question. This means Partzuf YESHSUT, of which he says that he is poised for a question, unlike upper AVI, from whom these Mochin are not extended because they are not poised for a question, as they are AVI that is not known.
He says that it indicates a force that was lifted in a swing, and the swing was in a whisper. Commentary: “And  said” is Aba, Elokim is Ima, lower AVI, YESHSUT. You already know that the emergence of Mochin de Gadlut is by returning the letters ELEH of Bina from the place of ZON to Bina, to complement the name Elokim. “And  said” indicates the force that was lifted with a swing, which swung the letters ELEH from the place of ZON to the place of Bina because this swing was done by the illumination of Aba, implied in the word, “And  said.” And the swing that the illumination of Aba makes, he makes it in secret, in a whisper. That is, the illumination of Hochma is not known outside of him, but the light is hidden in his place because of lack of light of Hassadim, for Hochma does not illuminate without a clothing of light of Hassadim.
The light extends from Ein Sof at the Rosh of the thought, in the essence of Bina, in her GAR, which is called “the head of the thought,” and not to the ZAT of the thought. It is so because GAR can receive the light of Hochma without clothing of Hassadim, hence the light expands in them although there is no Hassadim there. But ZAT cannot receive the light of Hochma without clothing in light of Hassadim, so because the light of Hassadim is lacking there, the light of Hochma cannot spread in them.
“And God said” means that now that palace has begotten the holy seed, with which she was previously impregnated. The palace is Bina, called YESHSUT. The holy seed are ZON. He says that until now, once Aba, who is “And  said” swung the letters ELEH and returned them to Ima, MI, and the letters of Elokim were completed in her, Ima, the palace, delivered ZON, which adhere to the letters ELEH, with which she was impregnated.
It is so because since the letters ELEH were fallen in the degree of ZON during the exit of Bina from the Rosh, they became one degree with the ZON. It is so because the rule is that the upper one who descends to the lower one become like him. Likewise, the lower one who rises to the upper one becomes like him. Therefore, when the illumination of Aba swung the letters ELEH to the place of Bina, ZON—who were attached to them as one degree—rose with them, and ZON connected to Bina, as well. It is considered that Bina was impregnated with ZON because ZON clung to her and became a holy seed to her, for when they are attached to her they receive Mochin of holiness from Aba, like Bina herself. This is the meaning of the fetus, who eats what its mother eats.
Bina delivered ZON in a whisper, and the one who was born was heard outside. This seems perplexing, since her delivering is the same matter as the one who was born. And if she gave birth in a whisper, than the newborn was not heard outside.
Yet, there are two births here: 1) The birth of the Mochin for ZON while they are still inside Bina. 2) The birth of ZON to bring them out of the place of Bina, into their own degree.
Indeed, the birth of the Mochin—made by the swinging of the letters ELEH to the place of Bina, when Bina returns to Rosh de AA—is considered illumination in a whisper, without expansion outwards for lack of Hassadim. And his saying that she gave birth in a whisper relates to the birth of the Mochin, but the birth of ZON themselves, and their exit from the place of Bina to their own place was done by the Zivug of Bina on the Masach de ZON, which elicits the level of Hassadim to clothe the light of Hochma in Hassadim. At that time she delivers the ZON and lowers them to their own place. And now that the Hochma has clothed in Hassadim, the Mochin are heard outside, meaning they have expansion.
The one who gave birth to ZON, gave birth to him in a whisper; it was not heard at all. This relates to the birth of Mochin for ZON while they are inside Bina, for then they are in secret. When ZON depart from Bina, a voice that is heard outside is made, and this relates to the exit of ZON from Bina to their own place, which was done after the elicitation of the level of Hassadim on the Masach de ZON, when the level of Hochma clothes in Hassadim and she has expansion outward to illuminate in the lower ones.
We should know that the whole cause of the birth of ZA and his exit from Bina is the Zivug on Masach de ZA to extend the level of Hassadim, in a way that the clothing of Hochma in Hassadim and the birth of ZA come as one. It is so because by that Zivug it becomes apparent that the degree of ZA does not belong to Bina, and the disparity of form is considered “birth.”
31) “Let there be light.” Anything that comes out and is emanated in the worlds comes out in that verse, “Let there be light.” That is, the ways of the work of the Zivug, explained in the verse, “Let there be light,” work the same way in the emanation of the Mochin of all the degrees.
The word, Yehi  implies AVI, Yod-Hey of Yehi . Yod implies Aba, Hey implies Ima, meaning lower AVI, which are called YESHSUT. After the letters Yod-Hey in the word Yehi, it was brought back to the first point, writing a point, Yod, once again, like the first Yod, as it is written, Yehi, to be a beginning for an expansion into something else. It is so because the Yod that is placed at the end of the word Yehi, after AVI, which are Yod-Hey, hints that that Yod entered the light of AVI, who became the level of Avir, since the letters ELEH of Elokim fell from them and descended to the place of ZON, leaving only MI de Elokim in them, Ruach.
For this reason, AVI diminished and received a Yod in their light. By that, a beginning for expansion of the Mochin to another Partzuf was made, ZON, for because of their diminution, the letters ELEH descended to ZON. Later, when the words ELEH return to them, ZON rise along with them and receive Mochin from them. Thus, because of the entrance of the Yod to the light Yod-Hey, which became Avir, a beginning was made for expansion of the Mochin for ZON, of whom it is written, “Let there be light.”
32) The words Ohr , Yehi Ohr  are not renewal of light, but a return of the light that AVI had already had, since the Yod, who diminished the light of AVI into Avir, departed there once more, and the light returned to AVI as it was in them before they diminished.
The expansion of the light of “Let there be light” is expansion that expanded and was fissured in the concealment of the upper, hidden AVI, AA. Thus, there is really no new HaVaYaH here, but the wholeness that existed before it was fissured reappeared.
First, he fissured the ten Sefirot de AVI and brought out of himself a single, hidden point. This is because Ein Sof fissured the ten Sefirot de AVI with his own Avir, and disclosed that point, Yod, which was given in the light of AVI, who also became Avir.
Commentary: That light is not light of Hochma de AA, but the light of Bina de AA, for when she was in Rosh AA, Bina was also considered Hochma, and once the Hochma de AA took her out from the Rosh to his Guf, she became VAK without GAR, Hochma.
At that time Bina is regarded as her ten Sefirot being fissured because her GAR of lights departed from her NRNHY, and the lower Kelim—Bina, Tifferet, and Malchut—divided from her degree and descended to ZON, and only Kelim of KH with light of NR remained in her. This is regarded as fissuring in the Kelim, and the Avir in the light that was in her. That Bina de AA is clothed inside AVI, which are implied in the Yod-Hey of Yehi, so that anything that AA wishes to give to AVI, he does it in his own Bina first, and what is given into his Bina is given to AVI.
For this reason, first he fissured the ten Sefirot de Kelim that Bina had while she was in Rosh AA, who elevated the Masach to Kli Hochma and mated there. By that, the three Kelim—Bina, Tifferet, and Malchut—divided and descended from Bina into ZON, and he elicited a single hidden point out of himself. By that, he elicited in Bina a hidden point, Yod that entered the light that she had, and her light had turned into Avir, since the GAR, which are Neshama, Haya, Yechida, departed from her and she remained only in the level of NR, Avir, from his own secret, his VAK. This is so because a secret is considered the Achoraim of light of Hochma, VAK without GAR.
Thus, Ein Sof divided from his own Avir because first, AA mated on the Masach below his own Hochma. By that, he took Bina out, from Rosh to VAK, the three Kelim—Bina, Tifferet, and Malchut, ELEH de Elokim—divided from her, and only Kelim KH, MI de Elokim, remained in her. He disclosed the point of Yod in the light that she had, and the light became Avir. This act of AA is called “a seed of silk.” He calls AA Ein Sof because every emanator is considered Ein Sof because he only emanates with the light of Ein Sof in him.
When that Yod expanded from the Avir, the word Ohr  remained from the word Avir. It is so because afterwards AA returned and lowered the Masach below the Hochma to the place of Malchut, by which the three Kelim—Bina, Tifferet, and Malchut—were brought back to the degree of Bina, as well as the complete light of NRNHY of lights. At that time Yod expanded and departed from her Avir because once the Yod departed from the hidden Avir, the Avir returned to being light, meaning a light complete with NRNHY, light of Hochma. Thus, when AA wishes to impart the Katnut to AVI, he inserts the Yod into his light and becomes Avir. And when he wishes to give them Mochin de Gadlut, he lowers the Yod from the Avir once more, and becomes light.
33) When the first point of AA, Yod, is found, his light appeared on her in the form of reaching and not reaching. When the point expanded, the light that remained from the Avir was revealed. Once he explained the ways of elicitation of Mochin de Katnut and Gadlut in Bina de AA himself, here he explains the order of imparting Mochin to AVI. He divides them into three Behinot, which are three points: Holam, Shuruk, Hirik.
Holam: When there was the first point of AA, Yod, before the Yod departed from the Avir, his light appeared on her in the form of reaching and not reaching. AA was illuminating to Bina at the point of Holam above the letters, which are the Kelim de Bina. Hence, the light reached Bina in the form of reaching and not reaching—reaching with Hassadim, and not reaching with Hochma. This is so because the light of Hochma remained in Rosh AA and did not reach Bina, who went out, to Guf AA, to VAK.
Shuruk: When the point, Yod, expanded and came out of Avir, the light of Hochma went out, and it is the word Ohr  that remains after the exit of the Yod from the word Avir. This is the light that was initially in Bina while she was in Rosh AA, and which disappeared with her exit from the Rosh. Now he has returned to her and exists in her. It is written about it, “And there was light,” indicating that there is no novelty in reality here, but it is the light that was already in Bina.
The light departed and was concealed because when the light departed, along with the return of Bina to Rosh AA, after the Zivug on the Masach in the place of Malchut came down, and she raised the three letters ELEH to her degree, along with the ZON that were attached to them, the light of Hochma departed and did not clothe in the letters ELEH, or in ZON that were attached to them in an Ibur, due to lack of clothing of Hassadim. Instead, it was hidden at the point of Shuruk because the light of Hochma did not depart from them, but they could not receive it although it was clothed in their Kelim, since they lacked the garment of honor that illuminates. For this reason, it is considered that the light illuminates in concealment. Hence, one point remained in Bina, where the Hochma always reaches with their Kelim—the point of Shuruk, where Hochma always reaches in a concealed way.
The Hirik reaches and does not reach. It reaches in Hassadim, and does not reach in Hochma. It illuminates in it as in the illumination of the first point from which it came out, through the Zivug that was done on the point of Hirik from the ZON that are attached to the letters ELEH. That point of Hirik illuminates in him like the illumination of the first point from which it came out. She extends the level of VAK in Bina the way AA illuminated in her while she was a point of Yod in her Avir, light of Hassadim.
At that time they cling to one another. The light of Hochma from the point of Shuruk clothes in light of Hassadim from the point of Hirik, and they illuminate together. They illuminate in one and in the other. It follows that YESHSUT illuminates in the two points together, in light of Hochma, and in light of Hassadim, and YESHSUT is completed with complete Mochin in four colors HB HG, since they received HB from Rosh AA, and received HG through the Zivug on the point of Hirik.
34) When Partzuf AVI ascends to Rosh AA and receives there the Mochin of the three points, all rise and unite with him. ZON, too, which are attached to the letters ELEH of AVI, rise with AVI and receive these Mochin from them. The Zohar explains the Tikkun Kavim  in the Kelim of ZON, for after it explained the order of expansion of Mochin in regard to the lights, in the three corrections—Holam, Shuruk, Hirik—it comes to explain the order of expansion of the Mochin in regard to the Kelim, which are called “three lines,” right, left, and the middle, which decides between them.
There are many appellations to the ten Sefirot, according to their relations. In regard to the clothing of the lights in the Kelim, the ten Sefirot are called KHB TM or HGT NHYM. In regard to the Kelim, the ten Sefirot are called 22 letters. Accordingly, there should have been five letters KHB TM or seven letters HGT NHYM, so why are they 22 letters? It is so because the letters extend from the seven Sefirot HGT NHYM de AVI, and since there are three Behinot in their Mochin—Holam, Shuruk, and Hirik—three kinds of expansion of seven Kelim extend from them. Seven Kelim extend from the point of Holam. These are considered right line. Seven Kelim extend from the point of Shuruk, and these are considered left line. And seven Kelim extend from the point of Hirik, and these are considered middle line. Together, they are 21 Kelim.
Yet, at the point of Hirik there is another Behina to the seven Sefirot HGT NHYM de AVI, which is the Masach of ZON. This is why that Behina is regarded as a Kli, as well, hence they are 22 Kelim, and they are the ones called “twenty-two letters.” Thus, the 22 letters are the same as ZAT, but in regard to the Kelim themselves, the Sefirot are called “letters,” and they are 22 because of the correction of the three lines in them.
When Partzuf AVI ascends to Rosh AA, everyone ascends and unites with him. At that time he is in the form of “reaching,” GAR, and is hidden in the place of Ein Sof, which is AA, and everything becomes one. Commentary: When Partzuf AVI ascends to AA, he becomes “reaching” with light of Hochma, like AA. However, the light does not spread below but is concealed in the place of AA due to lack of clothing of Hassadim. This is the point of Shuruk.
All three points become one, and the two points—Holam, Hirik—which were initially in the form of reaching and not reaching, VAK, have now become GAR due to their unification into one with the point of Shuruk. Therefore, the point that was in the light and made it into Avir, the point of Holam, is now complete light that became GAR due to her unification with the Shuruk.
Light of ZAT, HGT NHYM de AVI, expanded from the point of Holam, and seven letters of the alphabet illuminate in this expansion since the letters are the Kelim. Also, seven Sefirot HGT NHYM de AVI expand from the point of Holam, and seven Kelim, called “seven letters,” were established in the right line of ZON. They are regarded as right because the point of Holam is always considered light, as its essence is Hassadim, and any light is right.
The Kelim did not congeal yet and were still moist, since a moist substance indicates having no strong boundary, for when moist things meet, each mingles in the other’s boundary. But when the moist congeals and becomes solid, its boundary becomes strong and protected, and should it encounter another solid matter, it will not permeate its boundary whatsoever, and likewise with the other in it. Hence the Kelim did not yet congeal but were moist, meaning they did not guard their boundary, which is the boundary of the right, but were still mingled with the other lines.
Subsequently, darkness came out, and seven other letters of the alphabet came out in it because the expansion of illumination of ZAT de AVI from the point of Shuruk is regarded as exit of the darkness, since the Hochma in it is without Hassadim and does not illuminate. After the expansion of the seven Sefirot, being seven letters, from the illumination of the point of Holam into the right line of ZA, darkness came out. It is the expansion of seven Sefirot from the point of Shuruk, and seven other letters, which are seven Kelim, came out in this expansion of the darkness, becoming the left line of ZA.
Afterwards the firmament came out and ended the dispute of the two sides. Commentary: Once the two lines—right and left of ZA—came out and were extended, each in seven letters, a dispute occurred between them: each of them wished to maintain its dominion over ZA and revoke the other’s dominion, since each of them had a unique merit that did not exist in the other. The right line has a merit, as it is all light, illuminating from a never ending Zivug in upper AVI. It wished to cancel the left line, darkness. Similarly, the left line has a merit because it is light of Hochma, which is much higher than the light of Hassadim on the right, so it wished to cancel the illumination of the right. The letters were jolting from Rachamim to Din, and from Din to Rachamim, since once the left won and the letters became all Din, darkness, and once the right won and they all became Rachamim, light. They have not congealed and were still moist, each penetrating the boundary of the other, and they were always disputed.
The dispute continued until the illumination of the point of Hirik expanded from ZAT de AVI. This expansion is called “a firmament,” the level of the light of Hassadim that emerged in a Zivug by the Masach of ZON, attached to the letters ELEH. It ended the dispute between the two sides: the level of the firmament decided between the two lines, right and left. In the beginning, it connected and was added to the light of Hassadim on the right line, subduing the left, and then extended the illumination of the left line, as well, clothing it within the right line. Thus, the illumination of both was sustained and the dispute ended. This is why that expansion is regarded as the middle line, as it decides between the two lines, right and left.
Eight other letters came out in it, and then they were all made in the number 22: 14 letters of the two lines—right and left—and eight of the middle line, called “a firmament,” thus 22. It is so because this expansion, called “a firmament,” extended also from the seven Sefirot in Mochin de AVI with respect to the point of Hirik in them. Hence, there are seven letters here from their HGT NHYM.
There is also another Behina here to the HGT NHYM de AVI, regarding the Aviut of ZA. The point of Hirik is Masach de ZA, and that Aviut is the eighth letter. Hence, there are eight letters in the firmament—seven of AVI, and one of ZON.
The seven letters of the right side and the seven letters of the left side jumped on the firmament, and all were engraved in that firmament. Commentary: Because prior to the elicitation of the eight letters of the middle line, called “firmament,” the 14 letters in the two lines—right and left—could not exist, for due to the dispute they were jolted from Din to Rachamim and from Rachamim to Din, upon the elicitation of the firmament, the middle line, which can keep the illuminations of both of them in full, the 14 letters in the two lines—right and left—skipped and jumped on the middle line to be sustained by it.
It follows that the middle line itself includes the three lines and all 22 letters. This is why it is written that they were all engraved in that firmament, that all 22 letters were established in the firmament—eight letters of its own, and 14 letters from the two lines, right and left.
The letters were moist. The firmament congealed, the letters congealed with it, and were carved and depicted in their depictions as they should be. It is so because indeed, the force of congealing comes from the left line, from the point of Shuruk. Hence, it appears before the elicitation of the firmament. Yet, the letters were still moist, meaning insufficiently congealed to be solid in a strong boundary until the firmament emerged and congealed, and then the letters were fully congealed.
The reason is that complete congealing depends only on the force of the Masach in Nukva de ZA, which is considered Din, the eighth letter of the firmament. Therefore, as long as the eight letters of the firmament did not appear, the letters could not receive complete and solid congealing in a strong boundary.
Then the Torah was engraved there, ZA, to illuminate from it outward. After the boundaries of the letters were congealed, which are the Kelim, in all of its three lines, and each line received its letter combinations properly, Partzuf ZA—called “Torah”—was established, to illuminate to the lower ones.
35) The verse, “Let there be light,” implies the name “great God” that comes out of the first Avir, since the time when they were still AVI in VAK, prior to the exit of the Yod from the Avir. Once The Zohar explained the whole change of the Mochin from Katnut to Gadlut in three points and in three lines, and how they are implied in the verse, “Let there be light,” it explains how in each change, these Behinot remain in their form even after the Gadlut, and how they are implied in the five instances of “light” in the writings.
The verse, “Let there be light” implies the name “great God” because the verse, “Let there be light” implies the Sefira Hesed de ZA, the right line, which extends from the point of Holam de AVI, called “great God.” Hesed de VAK is called “God,” and Hesed de GAR is called “great God.” This is why he is called “God,” for He is Hesed that came out from the previous Avir de AVI from the time of Katnut before the Yod came out of Avir de AVI. He is called “great,” since now the Yod has already departed the Avir de AVI and returned to the light of Gadlut, and the ZON already received from them the Mochin de Gadlut.
“And there was” is the darkness, called Elokim. “And there was” applies to the Sefira Gevura de ZA when she extends only from the left line, the point of Shuruk. At that time it is dark, as she is Hochma without Hassadim, and he is called “a God concealed in His name.” He is called “light” once the left is included in the right, for now that right and left were included in one another through the level of Hirik, the light of Hesed in the right was extended to the Sefira Gevura on the left, and now the Sefira Gevura is also called “light.” It is so because then from the name El, Hesed, extends the name Elokim, and the name Elokim, too, becomes the light of Hesed.
The right was included in the left, and the left in the right. The right line is included with Hochma on the left line, hence the right is called “great God.” Likewise, the left, which was in the dark due to lack of Hassadim, was now included in the light of the Hesed of the right, and the Sefira Gevura became light, as well. This is, “And there was light,” said about Gevura de ZA.
36) “And God saw the light that it was good” applies to the middle pillar in ZA, the Sefira Tifferet in it, since Tifferet is the middle line, deciding between the two lines of ZA, HG, and is therefore called “the middle pillar.”
The verse, “That it was good,” said about Tifferet indicates that it illuminated above and below, and to all the other sides. It illuminated above means that it decided with the Mochin of AVI, by the force of the level of Hirik. Illuminated below means that it decides with the right and left in the Sefirot of ZA himself. To all the other sides means to the Sefirot NHYM from his Chazeh and below. Tifferet de ZA is the name HaVaYaH, which includes all the sides, meaning right and left, front and back, above and below. This explains how “And God saw that light that it was good” implies to Tifferet de ZA.
“And God divided between the light and the darkness” indicates that He separated the dispute between right and left so that everything would be in wholeness. Commentary: After the light and darkness from Chazeh de ZA and above, HG were included in one another, and the darkness in Gevura returned to being light, making a new separation in the right and left, which are light and darkness from the Chazeh and below, Netzah and Hod. The light is the Sefira Netzah, the darkness is the Sefira Hod.
37) “And God called the light, ‘day.’” “Called” means that He called and summoned, to elicit one light from the complete light that stands in the middle, Tifferet, which is the foundation of the world and on which the world stands, and from which the souls and all the worlds are born, which is a day from the right side. “Called” implies a preparation to emanate the Sefira Yesod de ZA from Tifferet de ZA. “And God called the light” of Tifferet to emanate from it the Sefira Yesod, called “day,” as it is from the light of Hassadim on the right.
“And to the darkness He called ‘night.’” He called and summoned and elicited one Nukva from the left side, which is darkness. She is white, and governs the night. This is why she is called “night,” for the quality of her dominion. She is the name ADNI, and the name “Master of all the earth.” The Nukva is called by all those names. “And to the darkness He called ‘night,’” summoning to elicit from the darkness, from the left line, the quality of night for the Nukva, the Sefira Malchut, ADNI. Thus, it has been explained how the seven Sefirot HGT NHYM are implied in the verses of the first day of the work of creation. Below he will explain the order of the emanation of Yesod and Malchut.
The seven days of creation are ZA and his Nukva. The six days are the Sefirot HGT NHY de ZA—the first day is Hesed; the second day is Gevura, etc.. The seventh day is Malchut. However, since the Sefirot are included in one another, all seven Sefirot HGT NHYM are included in Hesed, and likewise in each Sefira. This is why The Zohar explained to us the seven Sefirot HGT NHYM included in the first day of the work of creation as being HGT NHYM in Hesed.
38) The right entered that complete pillar in the middle when it is included with the left. That is, the Hesed de ZA, in which its Gevura is also included, entered its middle line, its Tifferet, and ZA rises to the first point, AA.
Commentary: As the beginning of the emanation in ZA was done by an ascent to the Rosh of AA with the letters ELEH of Ima, when he is attached to them and Ima gives him the Mochin there in three points—Holam, Shuruk, Hirik—so he must rise to AA for each new Behina  that emerges in him, or that he wishes to impart to the Nukva. There he receives Mochin anew for the Behina that he wishes to impart. Therefore, when he wishes to impart the Yesod de Gadlut of himself, or his Nukva, he rises once again with AVI to Rosh AA to receive the Mochin from them. That is, he ascends to the first point, AA.
The difference between the order of ascent to AA for the emanation of Yesod, and the order of ascent to all for the emanation of the Nukva, is that for the Yesod, the right de ZA governs, meaning Hesed, and it is all light, while the other two lines are included in it and subjugated to it. It is the contrary in the ascent for the Nukva: the ascent is dominated by the left, and the two lines right and middle are subjugated to the left.
Thus, in the order of ascent for the emanation of Yesod, right that is included with left enters the middle pillar and rises with the left and middle to AA, called “the first point.” Thus, the right is the dominating one, and the rest of the lines are subjugated to it. It rises to AA to receive the Mochin there from its corresponding Behina in those Mochin because Yesod is emanated primarily from the right line.
There, in AA, it takes and acquires the three points—Holam, Shuruk, and Hirik—which are called “holy seed.” That is, through the sowings, called Holam, Hirik, Shuruk, the Mochin de Hochma, called “holiness,” appear, and this is why the three sowings are called “a holy seed.”
It is so because there is no seed that is sown for Mochin except in the three sowings Holam, Shuruk, Hirik, meaning that all the Mochin that come out in the worlds come out only in an order of three points from which the three lines extend. Therefore, although the ascent is dominated by the right, which extends only from the point of Holam, it still needs to receive from all three points.
Thus, everything was connected, the illumination of all three points in the middle pillar, Tifferet, and emanated the Yesod of the world, the Sefira Yesod of Gadlut, which is fit for begetting souls. This is why it is the Yesod  of the entire world. And although the right de ZA is the primary emanator of the Yesod, who is the Sefira Hesed, still no formation or begetting can be drawn out if not from the middle one, which decides between the edges, which is Tifferet, who decides in regard to HG. However, Tifferet emanates the Yesod from the Mochin of the right that the Hesed received from his corresponding Behina from the Mochin de AVI.
Therefore, Yesod is regarded as being emanated by the domination of the right, although he includes all three lines. This is why Yesod is called “all,” as it acquires everything, for the illumination of all three lines in the light of passion. That is, by the passion of the left for the light of the right, Yesod decides and complements the left in the right and mingles them together. In other words, the left, Hochma without Hassadim, receives Hassadim and becomes completed, and the right, Hassadim, receives Hochma from the left and is completed.
And because all this is done by the middle line, the middle line acquires both of them and gives them to Yesod. For this reason, Yesod is regarded as acquiring everything, both light of Hassadim and light of Hochma. This explains the order of ascent and reception of the Mochin for the emanation of Yesod de ZA.
39) The left blazes by the force of the Gevura and smells the smell in all the degrees. From that blazing of fire, he emanated the Nukva, called “moon.” The Zohar explains the order of reception of the Mochin for the emanation of the Nukva. It says that it is dominated by the left, that the left line of ZA rose, and the two lines are included in it and are subjugated to it. He received there from his corresponding Behina in Mochin de AVI from the point of Shuruk, to which the two points, Holam and Hirik are subjugated.
It is known that the left illuminates in Mochin from below upward. This is why it can be included with the right, Hassadim, which illuminates from above downward. This illumination from below upward is called “scent,” for through the scent, it is received by the one who smells from below upward.
In the beginning, when the left, the point of Shuruk, illuminated alone without clothing in the right, it would also illuminate from above downward, but then the light was hidden in him and was under the force of the Gevura and blazing, since the Hochma could not expand in him for lack of Hassadim. Thus, he cancelled his illumination from above downward and received only the illumination of the scent, so that Hochma would illuminate in him only from below upward.
There, when the left of ZA rose to receive the Mochin, it received there from its corresponding Behina, the left of Mochin, which is called Shuruk there. Then it blazed by the force of the Gevurot because blazing awakened in it when it wished to expand from above downward. This is why it was said, “And smells the smell,” since it received the light only in the form of smell, meaning only from below upward, called “smell.” It smelled the smell on all the degrees. It did not clothe in Hassadim to illuminate from above downward, as well, but received the Hochma on all the degrees and illuminated by the force of blazing the fire of Gevurot, only smell.
In regard to that blazing of the fire, it emanated the Nukva, the moon, in the form of dominion of the left, and the other two lines are subjugated to it. The blazing is regarded as darkness because it extends from darkness. That is, although the aforesaid blazing is not darkness, because it receives the light from below upward, and it is light and not darkness, for only what is received from above downward is actual darkness, still, because it cannot extend the light from above downward for fear of the darkness, it is regarded as darkness, too.
And those two sides, right and left, elicited those two degrees, male and female, as explained. The Yesod was emanated from the dominion of ZA, male, and the Nukva was emanated from the left of ZA.
40) The Yesod grips to the middle pillar and receives from the additional light that was in it. Now it explains the difference between the male and the female, since the middle pillar that rose to YESHSUT and AA and was included in them there received from them Hassadim and Hochma. It is known that ZA receives only covered Hassadim, that it is not his nature to receive Hochma like GAR de Bina. It follows that the Hochma he received from AA is valued only as an addition to the light, which is a surplus to the measure of his reception. For this reason, he gave the addition of that light to the Yesod in him, who is fit for receiving it because it is from his Chazeh and below. The Yesod gripped to the middle pillar, to ZA, with the addition of light that was in him, in the light of Hochma, which is regarded as an addition in him.
The ZA was fully completed with both Hochma and Hassadim because he made peace to all the sides, in YESHSUT and in AA. It is so because through the Zivug that they made on the Masach de Hirik in him, MI partook in ELEH, the name Elokim was completed, and all the Mochin that the lower one causes in the upper one are imparted in their quantity and quality to the lower one, as well, who caused them. This is why at that time he obtained the Mochin from above, from AA, the right line, and from all the sides, meaning from the right and left lines, from YESHSUT. In his own middle line, he obtained Hassadim and Gevurot, and the joy of all the worlds is in him, meaning the illumination of Hochma, which arrests all the Klipot.
The Yesod  of the world came out from that addition of joy because the light of Hochma is an addition of joy which he does not use, hence he emanated and elicited the Yesod from the addition of joy, for he is fit to use those Mochin. He is called “addition” because he is an addition in ZA, called “the Yesod,” the receiver of that addition in the name “addition.”
All the Mochin below in the three worlds BYA are emanated from that Yesod, and spirits and souls of the righteous in the holy names, the Lord of hosts, who is a letter in all His hosts. He is called “the God of the gods of spirits,” from whom all the spirits and the souls of the righteous are emanated.
41) Night is the master of the whole earth, the Nukva, who is emanated from the left side, from that darkness. And because that darkness wishes only to be included in the right line, to receive light, and its might weakens, meaning that it cannot receive Hochma from AA because of the lack of Hassadim, his might weakens and becomes dark. This is why he expanded from the left line and the Nukva, called “night,” was emanated. The meaning of night is darkness without light, like her root, the left line of ZA. This is the reason why the Nukva is the quality of night, darkness.
When the night began to expand from the left, before her construction was completed, the darkness, left, entered and was included in the right line. The right line acquired it and the night remained lacking at her end because her root, the left line, disappeared in the meantime in the right, and did not complement her. It follows that besides the lack of the light of the Nukva, which extends due to her construction from the left line, a second deficiency was added to her, which is extended from the negation of her construction—the left line not managing to complete her construction. Thus, the two deficiencies in Nukva have been clarified: 1) She is night, darkness and not light; 2) She is deficient, the left did not complete her construction.
42) Just as the lust of the left, the darkness, is to be included in the light, the right line, the lust of the Nukva, night, is to be included in the day. That is, in regard to Nukva being built from the left line, which craves the light of the right line, the Nukva is also in the form of night, craving the light of Yesod, who is called day, meaning the first deficiency.
The darkness, the left line, subtracted its light, not managing to complete the construction of the Nukva because in the meantime it was included in the right line, which is an additional deficiency to the first deficiency. Because of it, he elicited the degree of the Nukva with deficiency of construction and without light, meaning in two deficiencies, as explained. For this reason, the Nukva needs two corrections: 1) to illuminate her from her darkness; 2) to complete her construction.
The darkness, the left line, illuminates only when it is included in the light of the right. So is the night that was built, and from which she emerged. She illuminates only when she is included in the day, Yesod. That is, the first correction of the Nukva is equal to her root, the left line of ZA. And as the correction of the left line is to be included in the right line, which is light of Hassadim, the correction of the Nukva is also to be included in the light of Hassadim of Yesod de ZA, who is called “day.”
The deficiency of the construction of the night is completed only in the addition, which is the addition of light that the Yesod received from the middle pillar, meaning the illumination of Hochma, which is redundant for ZA, the middle pillar. This is why he gave her to his Yesod, and that light of the addition in Yesod complements the structure of the Nukva, the second correction.
What was added here, he subtracted from here. What was added in Yesod de ZA by the middle pillar, the left line of ZA subtracted from the Nukva, since the left of ZA did not complete her construction. By that, she was diminished and is unfit for reception of the Hochma in the left line even after she has clothing of the light of Hassadim. That measure added the middle line of ZA to his Yesod with an addition of light, and the Yesod completes and complements that lack with the light of his addition.
43) In the addition, Yesod de ZA, there is an upper point, AA, and the middle pillar that decides on all the sides, Tifferet de ZA. It is so because in Yesod, there is illumination of Hochma from AA, which he received with the addition of light. There is also light of Hassadim in him, which he received from Tifferet de ZA. For this reason, two letters were added in Yesod, Vav-Yod of the verse, “and God called the light, ‘day,’” implying the emanation of the Sefira Yesod, where the Vav implies light of Hassadim that he received from the middle line, while the Yod implies illumination of Hochma that he received from AA.
In the emanation of the Nukva, night, those two letters are missing. “Called” is written in regard to her, and the letters Vav-Yod are missing in her. It is written, “And  called,” in Yesod, who is day, omitting the Vav-Yod from the word “Called” in the Nukva. Only “Called, ‘night’” are written in regard to her, since there are two deficiencies in the Nukva: 1) lack of light of Hassadim, 2) lack of construction.
The lack of the two letters Vav-Yod in the word “Called” implies them, where the deficiency of Vav implies a lack of light of Hassadim, and the deficiency of Yod implies a lack in her construction. Those two letters were added in Yesod. The intimation of Vav-Yod of “And God called the light, ‘day.’” It complements the two deficiencies of the Nukva. Here it is the meaning of the 72 letter name, engraved in the upper Keter, in the intimation of the two letters Vav-Yod.
Let There Be a Firmament
44) “And God said, ‘Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters, and let it divide between water and water.’” This is the correction in particular, separating the upper water from the lower water in the left. It is also the second detail of the creation of the world, for here occurred a dispute with the left: Up to now, on the first day, it is the right. And here, on the second day, it is the dominion of the left. For this reason, a great dispute erupted on the second day between that side and the right side. The left wished to annul all the dominion of the right, and the right wished to revoke all the dominion of the left.
The right, Hesed, the first day, is the wholeness of everything. For this reason, on the first day everything is written in the right. All seven days, HGT NHYM, came out in it and are implied in it, since all the wholeness depends on the right, for all the Sefirot receive their wholeness from the first Sefira, the Hesed, and the first day of the work of creation. Therefore, all the Sefirot emerged on the first day and are implied in the writings in it.
When the dominion of the left awakened, the dispute between it and the right awakened. The fire of anger intensified in the dispute, and Hell emerged and was created from that dispute. Hell awakened and was created from the left, and clung to the left, since on the first day of the work of creation, in the order of emanation of Hesed, the right line of ZA, it was initially emanated in Katnut. This is what the word “Let there be” implies, that Yod-Hey is AVI, and the last Yod implies entrance of the Yod to the light of AVI, which were diminished into being Avir, at which time the ZA was emanated in VAK, in the level of Ruach.
Afterwards, in the word, “And there was light,” the Gadlut of the right line emerged. It is likewise here in the emanation of the second day, Gevura and left line of ZA. First the Katnut was emanated, which is “Let there be,” when AVI were diminished by themselves, to emanate ZA at the level of Ruach, when they inserted a Yod into their light, which is “Let there be a firmament.” Afterwards the Gadlut of the left line came out, the GAR, as it is written, “And God made the firmament.”
And here, upon the elicitation of the Katnut in the diminution of “Let there be a firmament,” when AVI raised their Malchut to the place of the Zivug, below their Hochma, to the place of Bina, and lowered the Bina and TM outside their degree to the place of ZON and remained in VAK without GAR, at the level of Ruach, the creation of Hell was drawn out because of that diminution. That is, the forces of Din to punish the wicked were created. It is so because there are two kinds of ascent of Malchut to the place of Bina:
The ascent without any flaw, but to elicit Mochin for the lower one. At that time the three Sefirot Bina and TM descend to the degree of Kedusha beneath them, and the light of GAR departs to their superior at the point of Holam.
The ascent because of a flaw, through sins of the lower ones. At that time Malchut ascends to Bina to conceal the light of GAR from the lower ones, who are not worthy of using it. Then the three Kelim, Bina and TM, do not descend to the degree below them in Kedusha, but descend to the forces of the Din, which those Kelim rob for the construction of their own Partzufim, and by which they acquire the strength to sabotage and punish the wicked.
After the elicitation of Gadlut of the first day, the right line, the left line was necessarily completed with it in all its Gadlut. It is known that the left line extends from the point of Shuruk, Hochma, hence the left wished to control his light of Hochma and revoke the light of Hassadim in the right line, and the dispute between them was made.
And because of that dispute, the fire of anger came out, meaning the darkness of the dominion of the Shuruk expanded due to the lack of Hassadim, until finally Malchut returned to rise to the place of Bina as during the Katnut, when the light of GAR completely departed and the three Kelim, Bina and TM, fell to the forces of the Din because the ascent of Malchut was due to a flaw. Hell was created out of their sparks, and clung to the left, meaning anyone who wishes to enhance the power of the left will fall into the Din of Hell, which is attached to the left.
The right is the wholeness of everything because all the Sefirot receive their existence from him. Hence, on the right, the first day, all the corrections of Katnut and Gadlut in regard to “Let there be light” and “And there was light” are written. This is so because the wholeness of all the Sefirot depends on it, so when the right line is completed, all of them are completed.
The left line, too, receives its wholeness from it, and awakened in its dominion. When the left awakened in its dominion and felt its wholeness, it promptly stirred a dispute with the right line, wishing to cancel the light of the right, and make only its own light govern. The fire of anger extended from this dispute, meaning the darkness of the Shuruk, who causes the ascent of Malchut back to the place of Bina. And then, when she rose up, she dropped the Kelim of Bina and TM to the forces of Din, called Hell, and the Hell awakened and was created from the left, and clung to the left. That is, anyone who wishes to enhance the left falls into Hell, which is attached to the left.
45) Moses, with his wisdom, looked at it, and looked at the work of creation. In the work of creation was a dispute between left and right. In that dispute, evoked by the left, the Hell was created and attached to the left. The middle pillar, Tifferet, came between them and removed the dispute, making the two sides agree. Then Hell retired from the left and descended, the left was included in the right, and everything was peace.
It is so because the level of Hassadim that came out on the middle line, Tifferet, entered between the right and the left, subduing the left line with her Hassadim so it would clothe in the right, and removing the dispute. At that time Hell descended and retired from the left, meaning the Kelim of Bina and ZON departed from there and returned to their degree. This is considered that Hell descended and retired from those Kelim.
The left returned and obtained its GAR. That is, once the light of Hochma at the point of Shuruk, left line, clothed in Hassadim and was included in the right line, it was completed in its illumination in GAR. It therefore follows that the middle line agreed to keep the illumination of the two lines after it clothed them in one another, and made the two sides agree because it kept the illumination of them both, but separated their illumination so right would illuminate from above downward and the left would illuminate from below upward. By that, peace was made.
46) Likewise was the dispute between Korah and Aaron—the left disputed the right. It is so because in the tree of souls, Aaron is regarded as the right line and Hassadim, as he is a priest, and Korah is regarded as left, and Gevura, as he is a Levite. And because Korah disputed the priesthood, it is similar to the dispute between the left line and the right, which was in the beginning of the work of creation of the second day.
Moses looked in the work of creation and said, “I should remove the dispute between the right and the left. This is so because as Aaron and Korah are HG, right and left of the souls, Moses is Tifferet of the souls, the middle line. Therefore, when Moses looked in the work of creation and saw there how the middle pillar removed the dispute between the left and the right, he said that he, too, should remove the dispute between the right and the left from the tree of souls, as he is Tifferet of the souls. Moses exerted to make them agree, but the left was unwilling and Korah prevailed over Aaron with his Gevura .
47) Moses said, “Certainly, when the dispute of the left prevails, Hell should cleave, as it was in the work of creation, when Korah did not wish to cling above, to the correction of Kedusha, and be included in the right line, like the left of above. It is certain that he will come down to Hell with the force of his anger, as it was in the beginning of the work of creation during the dispute of the left line, when Hell came out and clung to the left.” So did Moses know that with the force of Korah’s dispute, Korah would descend to Hell and cling to it.
48) This is why Korah did not want the dispute settled by Moses, since the dispute was not in the name of heaven, meaning ZA, who is called “heaven,” and his Nukva, who is called “the name of heaven.” It says that this is why he did not accept Moses’ decision, since his dispute was not aiming for the unification of ZA with the Nukva, nor did he fear for the upper glory, who is Divinity. He denied the work of creation. That is, he refuted the correction of the decision of the middle line that occurred in the work of creation because he wished only for the left’s dominion. When Moses saw that he was denying the work of creation and that he was repelled from the Kedusha, then it is written, “And Moses was very angry.”
49) “Moses was very angry” because Korah and his company denied him, not letting him decide on that dispute. It is written, “And Moses was very angry” for the work of creation being denied, for blemishing the upper decision of the middle line over the right and left of ZA, which was established in the work of creation. It is about that that it writes, “Very.” Korah denied everything, both above in ZA and below in the souls, as it is written, “When they strove against the Lord,” ZA. Thus, his flaw reached above, to ZA, as well as below, to Moses. This is why Korah clung to Hell, as befitted him, as it is written, “And they, and all that belonged to them, went down alive into Sheol.”
50) The dispute that was established similar to that of above, which ascends and does not descend, and exists in a direct manner, is the dispute of Shamai and Hillel. Commentary: The middle line settles the dispute of above and sustains both of them, clothing them in one another. It separates their illumination where the left illuminates from below upward, and the right illuminates from above downward. Only in this way are they both sustained, and not otherwise.
The dispute that was established as above is that he ascends and does not descend, that the illumination of the left will illuminate from below upward, and not from above downward. Then the illumination of the left exists in the direct manner in a way that it does not cancel the illumination of the right, and both will illuminate.
This is the dispute of Shammai and Hillel. Shammai was the left of above, as we learn that all his days he was eating in honor of the Sabbath, that he would eat on weekdays and illuminate from the weekdays to the Sabbath, from below upward. But Hillel would say, “Blessed be the Lord each day,” extending from above downward—like the right line of above—for that day in which he was.
The Creator divided and settled between them. That is, the dispute and the difference between Shammai and Hillel was extended to them from the middle line of above, who is the Creator. Through that difference, where the left illuminates from below upward, and the right from above downward, he keeps the illumination of them both, and clothes them in one another. At that time the Creator gives the illumination of both of them in a Zivug for the Nukva.
This is a dispute for the name of heaven. That is, the difference between right to left in the way of their illumination. He mates the name, Nukva, with the heaven, ZA, and the heaven, ZA, separates and divides that dispute to sustain them both. This is why their illumination persists. That dispute in the manner of their illumination is like the work of creation, like the way he made the middle line for the correction of the work of creation.
Korah denied the whole correction of the work of creation, and that dispute was on ZA, who is called “heaven,” over the deciding line. He wished to deny the corrections in the Torah, ZA. Of course that dispute was because the force of the Din of Hell clung to Korah, which is why Korah clung to him, meaning fell to Hell.
51) That matter is in the book of Adam HaRishon. When the darkness awakened to its dominion, it awakened with great might and created the Hell in it, and the Hell clung to it in that dispute. Once the anger and the force of the Gevurot settled, the dispute awakened in another way, and it is a dispute of love. It is a dispute in the manner of their illumination, for the left illuminates from below upward and the right from above downward, where both agreed to it for their love for one another, for the left craved the Hassadim of the right, and the right—the illumination of Hochma in the left. And because they parted in the manner of their illumination, they clothed in one another, the right was completed by the left, and the left by the right.
52) There were two kinds of dispute—one in the beginning and one in the end. This is “the ways of the righteous,” whose beginning is hard and tormented, and whose end is tranquility. Korah was from the left, in the beginning of the dispute between right and left, which is in anger and in the force of the Gevurot. That is, each wished to cancel the illumination of the other, and as a result the Hell emerged and clung to Hell. Shammai was considered left, at the end of the dispute of right and left, when the ire and anger had already subsided. At that time there is a need to evoke a dispute of love, a dispute in the manner of their illumination, so they receive consent and existence through the heaven, the deciding line, to clothe them in one another.
53) “Let there be a firmament in the midst of the water, and let it divide between water and water.” This is the first dispute, the awakening of the anger and the force when each intensifies to cancel the illumination of the other. The Creator wished to remove the dispute and awakened the Hell until the anger and the force cooled down. Out of the flaw of the dispute, which blocked the lights, Malchut rose once more to the place of Bina and concealed the GAR, and Bina and TM fell into Midat ha Din, which is called Hell. Thus, the dispute was settled because with the ascent of Malchut, the dominion of the left line was canceled, since he returned to Katnut.
Then it is written,” And God made the firmament and divided between the water that is below the firmament and between the water that is above the firmament.” That division is a dispute of love and fondness, and provision of the world, a division in the manner of illumination. The dispute of love is the dispute between Shammai and Hillel.
The division in the verse, “And God made the firmament,” is the end of the dispute. However, Korah was in the dispute of the anger, which is the division in the verse, “Let there be a firmament in the midst of the water,” which is the beginning of the dispute. But the dispute of Shammai and Hillel, which is the end of the dispute, is of love, and for the name of heaven. The oral Torah, Nukva, is called “name.” She entered the written Torah, ZA, called “heaven,” in love, and they were in a complete Zivug for she received complete Mochin from ZA.
54) There is separation only in the left, for on the second day, which is left, it is written, “And let it divide between water and water.” In regard to Korah, it is written, “Is it not enough for you that the God of Israel has separated you from the congregation of Israel?” Of the Levites, it is written, “At that time the Lord separated the tribe of Levi.” Thus, there is separation only on the second, the left.
55) If separation is on the second, why was separation said of Levi, who is Jacob’s third son? Instead, the separation should have been in Shimon, who is Jacob’s second son. Although Levi is the third one, in Jacob’s mind he is still the second, since Reuben is not considered the first among Leah’s sons, for at the time Jacob thought she was Rachel, and there is always separation only in the second. Then, after the separation was made in the second one, it is all as proper and whole as it should be, since through the separation, the lights clothe one another and are complemented by one another.
56) The separation that we do at the end of the Sabbath is to separate those forces that govern the weekdays from the Kedusha, which governs on the Sabbath. And at the end of the Sabbath, one side rises from the Hell in the form of an evil eye that wishes to rule in the world when Israel say the verse, “You establish the work of our hands.”
Explanation: There are two sides to the evil eye, the source of the whole of the Sitra Achra—right and left—as it is written, “Let a thousand fall at Your side, and ten thousand at Your right; it shall not approach You.” The right of the evil eye is in the number 1,000, and the left is in the number ten thousand. When meeting a person, their left is opposite the right of the person, and their right, opposite the left of the person, as it is written, “Only with your eyes will you look, and you will see the recompense of the wicked.” That is, when you look with your good eyes and distinguish between good and evil, you will see the recompense of the wicked.
And at the end of the Sabbath, the forces of Din begin to rule in the world, and the left side of the evil eye rises, the ten thousand who wish to rule in the world when Israel say the verse, “You establish the work of our hands.” It is so because the work of our hands is a holy covenant. Hence, when Israel say, “And establish upon us the work of our hands,” the holy covenant in completeness, the left side of the evil eye awakens to cling to the holy covenant to corrupt it. It comes out of that degree of the Sitra Achra, called “left,’ in regard to the number ten thousand, and wishes to mingle in the seed of Israel through their grip to the holy covenant, and rule over Israel to punish them.
57) Israel do an act of Mitzva with the myrtle and the wine and say the Havdalah , and the Sitra Achra parts from them. It is so because through action and words of Mitzvot, the intention of the heart awakens to know all the loathing and harm that extends from the transgressions, and all the life and goodness that extends to those who do His will. This is the separation, since then they necessarily part from the Sitra Achra and cling to Kedusha.
The Sitra Achra parts from Israel because according to the measure of acknowledgment of the harm in the bad way, so is the measure of removal of the evil from the man. That side becomes lower and comes to its place in Sheol , the place of Korah and his company. That is, he sinks in his origin and does not spread in the world. But since he is the left side, he cannot be removed completely until the end of correction. This is why it is written about the right side, “Let a thousand fall at Your side.” But in regard to the left, it does not write “Fall,” but rather, “And ten thousand at Your right; it shall not approach You,” since they will only be prevented from approaching, but will not be completely cancelled before the end of correction.
Likewise, here the Sitra Achra descends to her place in Sheol and is not completely cancelled, similar to the verse, “And they, and all that belonged to them, went down alive into Sheol.” But Korah and his company did not go down to Hell before Israel parted from them, as Moses told them, “Separate yourselves from among this congregation.” Here, too, the Sitra Achra does not go down to Hell at the end of the Sabbath, before Israel make the Havdalah with wine and myrtle and part from the Sitra Achra. Thus, it has been explained that the Havdalah at the end of the Sabbath is also similar to the Havdalah of Korah.
58) Separation  is always only in the second, which is the left line, for even the separation of the end of Sabbath is also to separate the Sitra Achra, who extends from the left line. In the beginning of the dispute—when Gevura and the anger that the left evoked in the dispute, before he quieted in moderation, and Hell was created in him—then all those angels that slander to their Master above, the Creator, the middle line, were created.
They slander his decision and lean toward the dominion of the left. For this reason, the fire burns them and they burn. Similarly, the rest of the angels, all those who idle away and have no sustenance, and who burn in fire, all those come out because of the fire of the dispute in the beginning, which was on the second day. Likewise, Korah, too, fell down and was burned in Hell, like those angels who burn in the river of fire. It is all in this manner—they extend from the beginning of the dispute that was in the fire of anger.
59) “And God said, ‘Let there be a firmament.’” This means that he expanded expansion from one to the other, that the lower water expanded and divided from the upper water, and the upper water expanded and divided from the lower water through the firmament.
Bina is called water. KHB TM in the general water of Bina are the five letters Elokim . “Let there be a firmament” means that the firmament will come in the middle of the water, in the middle of the five letters Elokim under the two letters Aleph-Lamed. The two letters Aleph-Lamed of Elokim, KH, would spread from the firmament upward in the upper water, Hassadim, and the three letters Hey-Yod-Mem of Elokim, Bina and TM, would spread downward from the firmament in the lower water.
The two letters Aleph-Lamed of Elokim from the firmament and above, are the right part. Aleph-Lamed indicates the name of the Hesed, which is on the right. The name “great God” expanded and parted from the waters of Bina. That is, because the firmament, the name “great God” expanded there, from the firmament and above. It parted from the rest of the water, from the three letters Hey-Yod-Mem, to complete the name El, so the upper water and lower water would mingle in one another through that expansion.
In other words, by that the letters Aleph-Lamed from the firmament and above parted, and the letters Hey-Yod-Mem are from the firmament and below, so that the name El, Hesed, will receive additional completeness. At that time the letters Aleph-Lamed will reconnect to the letters Hey-Yod-Mem, to be included in one name, Elokim. His calling the two letters Aleph-Lamed of Elokim by the name “great God” is because they are from Bina, who is always considered GAR, implied in the name “great.” Likewise, The Zohar calls the three letters Hey-Yod-Mem of Elokim “great” for the above-said reason.
The name El  expanded from Elokim, leaving the three letters Hey-Yod-Mem. These Hey-Yod-Mem expanded down from the firmament and became lower water, Yod-Mem-Hey. That is, the letters Hey-Yod-Mem of Elokim that were previously connected to Bina in great God, and were upper water, now—through the firmament that was made in the middle of the water—these Hey-Yod-Mem were pushed and spread to the degree below them, ZON, where they become lower water, like the degree of ZON. At that time they lost the combination of Hey-Yod-Mem, and turned into the combination Yod-Mem-Hey. This is the expansion that he expanded in the second, expanded from the combination Hey-Yod-Mem into the combination Yod-Mem-Hey.
The upper water are Hey-Yod-Mem, as it is written, “That sea  is great and wide.” Thus, the sea is the upper water, since great indicates Bina, who is always GAR. If the letters are reversed, Yod-Mem-Hey , it indicates that they are lower water. When the letters Yod-Mem-Hey were established, rising above the firmament once more, connecting with the name “great God,” and returning to the combination, “That sea is great,” then everything—El and “that sea”—became one whole, one name, Elokim. And that name, Elokim, expanded in three places, in the three points—Holam, Hirik, Shuruk.
60) Upper waters are males, lower waters are females. Initially, before they were corrected, the upper and lower waters were mixed together until they were corrected and parted from one another to distinguish about them that these are upper waters, those are lower waters, and to recognize that this is the name Elokim, Bina, that is the name ADNI, Malchut, this is the first Hey of HaVaYaH, Bina, and that is the bottom Hey of HaVaYaH, Malchut.
Commentary: Waters are the ten Sefirot of Bina. It is so because the ten Sefirot of Hochma are called “lights,” and the ten Sefirot of Bina are called “water.” In the verse, “Let there be a firmament in the midst of the water,” the firmament came and was placed in the middle of the water, under the letters Aleph-Lamed of Elokim, KH. Because of it, the three letters Hey-Yod-Mem of Elokim, Bina and TM, fell to the degree below Bina, to ZON, and the Hey-Yod-Mem of Bina mingled with the Nukva de ZA and became lower water Yod-Mem-Hey like the Nukva de ZA, who is called Yamah.
Initially, the upper and lower waters were mixed together. Prior to the correction, the Hey-Yod-Mem of Elokim, the upper, male waters, were mixed with the Nukva de ZA, Yod-Mem-Hey, the lower, female waters. Then they were corrected once more so the letters Hey-Yod-Mem were parted from ZA once again, rose up from the firmament, and connected with the letters Aleph-Lamed of Elokim, mingled in a single name, Elokim. Then the upper water, Hey-Yod-Mem, parted from the lower water, Yod-Mem-Hey, and it was recognized that the Hey-Yod-Mem are from the name Elokim, and the Nukva de ZA is the name ADNI. It was also recognized that the letters Hey-Yod-Mem are from the first Hey, Bina, and Nukva de ZA is the bottom Hey, Malchut.
Then it is written about them, “And God made the firmament.” This expansion took the name Elokim , meaning that the verse, “And God made,” indicates that that expansion of the Hey-Yod-Mem returned to Aleph-Lamed and together became the name Elokim and upper water, since Elokim is upper water and the name ADNI, Nukva de ZA, is the lower water.
“Made” implies correction and the end of the work, since now the diminution was reestablished, having been formed in the verse, “Let there be a firmament.” Also, the verse, “Let there be a firmament in the midst of the water,” indicates the beginning of the dispute, when the letters Hey-Yod-Mem of Bina fell to ZON and became the lower water, Yod-Mem-Hey. And the verse, “And God made the firmament” speaks of the end of the dispute, at the time of correction, when the letters Hey-Yod-Mem return to their degree and connect with the great God in Bina, becoming the name Elokim.
Thus, the letters Hey-Yod-Mem, the upper water, were recognized, and only the name ADNI, Nukva, remained for the lower water. And yet, because the waters are males, Hey-Yod-Mem, they were complemented through female waters, which are the Nukva de ZA. For this reason, the name Elokim of Bina expanded to the female waters, too, and the ZON received the same Mochin of Elokim, as well.
61) And although He divided on the second day between the upper and lower waters, as it is written, “And God made the firmament, and divided the waters that were under the firmament from the waters that were above the firmament,” the dispute between right and left, which are Aleph-Lamed Hey-Yod-Mem was not cancelled until the third day, Tifferet. The third day decided the dispute between right and left through the level of Hassadim that emerged on the Masach de TM, which are the third day. At that time the two lines, Aleph-Lamed Hey-Yod-Mem clothed in one another and both existed, as it should be.
Thus, although the upper water, Hey-Yod-Mem of Elokim, returned to being upper water already in the second day, the dispute between the Hey-Yod-Mem and Aleph-Lamed was still corrected only by the third day, which is TM, lower water, and only by their level of Hassadim do Aleph-Lamed and Hey-Yod-Mem unite into a single name, Elokim. Therefore, the name Elokim expands to the lower water, TM, and they, too, receive those Mochin of Elokim, since any lower one that is corrected for a higher one is rewarded with all that measure of Mochin that he corrected for the upper one, as well.
And because of that dispute, although it is the sustenance of the world, it is still not written on the second day, “That it was good,” since the work had not yet been completed in it, due to the dispute explained in the verse, “Let there be a firmament in the midst of the water, and let it divide between water and water.” That is, Hey-Yod-Mem of Elokim fell to ZON and became lower waters, Yod-Mem-Hey. And although it became the sustenance of the world, for had they not fallen to ZON, it would not be conceivable that ZON and the souls of the righteous would have Mochin, still, because the correction was completed only on the third day, it was not said, “That it was good,” on the second day, for it cannot be said, “That it was good,” on an incomplete correction.
The upper waters and lower waters were mixed together and there were no offspring in the world until they were parted from one another and the upper waters and lower waters were each recognized separately. Then they made offspring.
62) And although the division between upper and lower waters was already present on the second day, there was a dispute between Aleph-Lamed, right, and Hey-Yod-Mem, left. Only the third day decided and equalized everything, connecting them in a single name, Elokim. The third day, ZA, is the name engraved in its carving, Hey-Vav-Hey, to equalize the upper waters, Bina, with the lower waters, Malchut. It is so because Hey-Vav-Hey is two letters Hey, and Vav in the middle. The first Hey is Bina, the bottom Hey is Malchut, and Vav in the middle is ZA, who comes to complement and illuminate in the two sides, above in Bina and below in Malchut.
Commentary: Since the Vav decided with its level of Hassadim in the two sides in Bina, Aleph-Lamed Hey-Yod-Mem, the Vav itself is rewarded with those Mochin, too, and gives them to the Nukva, who is Tifferet, and she equalizes with the first Hey. This mark is the fissuring of the waters of the Jordan,  when the upper waters of the Jordan rose one move and did not descend to the Dead Sea, and they are the first Hey of HaVaYaH, Bina. the bottom waters of the Jordan, from Israel and below, descended to the Dead Sea, and are the bottom Hey of HaVaYaH, Malchut, while Israel, who are Vav de HaVaYaH, went in the middle, between the upper waters of the Jordan and the lower waters of the Jordan. It follows that Israel, who are Vav de HaVaYaH, receive from the first Hey and give to the bottom Hey.
63) Five times it is written, “Firmament,” on the second day, and the one who lives forever, Yesod de ZA, walks in them and leads the worlds with them. Commentary: The firmament is a Sium  made in the middle of each degree due to Tzimtzum Bet, for during the Katnut, it ends the degree below the Hochma, and takes Bina and TM outside the degree. At the time of Gadlut, it lowers the Sium below the Hochma back to the place of Malchut, and returns Bina and TM to the degree.
The one who lives forever, Yesod de ZA, in whom there is the force of his Sium, the Masach, goes with that Masach in his Yesod, and rises below the Hochma, ending there the degree in the firmament that divides between water, KH, and water, Bina and TM. It conducts in them, meaning that at the time of Gadlut, he lowers the ending Masach once more—his Yesod, the firmament—to the place of Malchut, and returns Bina and TM to the degree. Then he leads the worlds and gives them Mochin.
Five times it is written, “Firmament,” since all that is found in the whole is also found in the elements within it. Therefore, since there is a firmament that divides in the middle of the degree of ZA, there is also a firmament in each of the five Sefirot HGT NH in him, for each Sefira consists of ten Sefirot. For this reason, there is a firmament between them, dividing between KH and their Bina and TM, as in the whole of ZA. This is why they are five firmaments. But the ten Sefirot are essentially only five, KHB TM, which are called HGT NH in ZON.
They are all included in one another, and if that dispute of the middle line had not been settled, they would not have been mingled or established in one another. Commentary: Although there is a special firmament in each Sefira of ZA, still, all five firmaments are included in one another, since there is no wholeness of the Mochin except through the middle line, since on the right line, Hochma is missing, and on the left line, where there is Hochma, Hassadim are missing. This is why it is dark, for Hochma, too, cannot illuminate, since Hochma does not illuminate without Hassadim. Rather, only through the middle line were the lines included in one another and were completed in their illumination from one another.
By that, all five Sefirot of ZA and the five firmaments in them are mingled into one, since Tifferet, which is the middle line, unites the HG into one with him, and to that extent imparts to Yesod. And he unites the two lines NH into one, in a way that they all illuminate only because of their unification in the middle line.
Five firmaments are 500 years that the tree of life, ZA, clings to them, to bear fruit and offspring in the world. The tree of life, ZA, is 500 years apart, which is five firmaments that ZA inherits from Bina. The Sefirot of Bina are in hundreds, hence the five firmaments are considered 500 years. Through those five firmaments that ZA receives because of his decision in Bina, he imparts fruit and offspring—Mochin and souls—to the worlds, and all the waters of Beresheet, meaning all the kinds of Mochin that pour out and extend from Beresheet, who is AA, divide below him, through him.
Commentary: As ZA himself receives the Mochin from Bina only in five firmaments that separate and divide each degree in him into two—upper waters and lower waters—when ZA gives Mochin and souls to the worlds, they, too, divide and separate in the firmament that divides between upper waters and lower waters, like ZA, under whom and by whom they are divided. That is, they, too, divide into upper waters and lower waters, like him.
King David, the Nukva, receives everything from ZA and then dispenses everything to the lower worlds, BYA. The Nukva de ZA receives everything from ZA—both upper waters and lower waters. She takes the upper waters to herself, and dispenses the lower waters in BYA, to which the words, “And he dealt among all the people, even among the whole multitude,” “You give it to them; they gather it,” and “She rises while it is still night and gives prey to her household,” imply.
64) When the dispute awakened because of the left, a haze of fire multiplied and intensified. The darkness and the fire come out and multiply in the dispute of the two lines, right and left. Spirits were born out of the haze and promptly congealed, remaining without moisture. Commentary: Hassadim are called “water.” Since the spirits are born out of the haze, which comes because of the dispute of the left over the right, who is Hassadim, the spirits were therefore born in complete dryness, without any moisture of Hassadim.
Those spirits were male and female, and various kinds of evil harm-doers were born and came out from them. Here is the intensification of the spirit of Tuma’a in all those strong spirits, and they are the Klipa of the foreskin, since the first male and female that came out and were born from the haze were not so evil, and Tuma’a was still not apparent in them because they were close to Kedusha. Rather, the spirit of Tuma’a had already grown in those spirits and harm-doers that were born to those male and female.
Those spirits grew in Tuma’a in the fierce harm-doers—one is called “echis,” and one is called “serpent”—and those two kinds became one. The echis gives birth to 70 years, and the serpent to only seven years. But when they join together everything returns to the seven years of the serpent. At that time the echis, too, gives birth to seven years, like the serpent, and they become as one species.
Thus, the Tuma’a does not exit from the Kedusha all at once, but in a manner of cascading by degrees. They correspond to the three degrees, ZA, Yesod, and Malchut de Kedusha, since the first male and female that came out of the mist of Kedusha, no Tuma’a was apparent in them yet, and they are the opposite of ZA de Kedusha.
But the offspring of those male and female, which are the echis and the serpent, are already complete harm-doers. The echis corresponds to Yesod de ZA, a male. His seven Sefirot are in tens, hence he gives birth to 70 years, corresponding to the seven Sefirot included in Yesod. The serpent corresponds to Malchut, whose seven Sefirot are in units, hence he gives birth to seven years, opposite the seven Sefirot included in Malchut, since the Sefirot of Nukva are units, of ZA are tens, and of Bina are hundreds. Finally, the echis descended to the degree of the serpent because in the Klipot, the Nukva overcomes the male. Thus, the echis returned to the number seven years, opposite the seven Sefirot of Malchut.
65) Thus, Hell is called by seven names, and the evil inclination is also called by seven names because the name seven indicates Malchut. And since Malchut de Klipot prevailed and everything returned to the seven years of the serpent, Hell, too, returned to the seven names, as did the evil inclination, corresponding to the seven Sefirot of Malchut, since she prevailed over all of them.
The Tuma’a spread from here to the world in many degrees, and it is all from the left, which is good and evil. This is the settling of the world, for because the echis descended to the degree of the serpent, the degrees of Tuma’a increased in the world because in truth, there can only be a Klipa opposite Malchut, on whom there was the Tzimtzum, and not over Yesod de ZA, who is from the first nine. The Klipa opposite Malchut is called a “serpent.” However, because of Tzimtzum Bet, when Malchut rose to the place of Bina, a grip for the Klipot was made opposite Yesod de ZA, too.
By that, the echis and the serpent joined together, and the echis returned to the seven years of the serpent. The Tuma’a of the serpent was also on the echis, who is from his root, opposite Yesod de ZA, against whom there is no gripping in the Klipot. Now, however, the Tuma’a was on the echis, too.
However, it is all from the left, good and evil, meaning from Malchut, who is left, good and evil. That is, that Tuma’a that multiplied opposite Yesod de ZA is not from Yesod, but only from Malchut, who mingled in it by the ascent of Malchut to Bina, and the Dinim in Malchut expanded to half of Bina and ZA below it, too. This is the settling of the world. That is, the expansion of Dinim of Malchut to ZA, which was done by the ascent of Malchut to Bina, was for the correction of the settling of the world, for were it not for the ascent of that Malchut, no Mochin would be received for the ZON, and the world would not be fit for inhabiting people.
This is the meaning of the holy name, engraved in 18 letters and appointed over the rains of good will, largess, blessing, and settling of the world. Commentary: Yod-Hey-Vav of HaVaYaH without the bottom Hey contains six combinations: Yod-Hey-Vav, Hey-Yod-Vav, Vav-Yod-Hey, Vav-Hey-Yod, Hey-Vav-Yod, and Yod-Vav-Hey, whose letters are 18. That name indicates the ascent of Malchut, the bottom Hey, to the first Hey, Bina, and she disappears. The name HaVaYaH remains there but in the three letters Yod-Hey-Vav, without the bottom Hey. In the combination, it is called the “18 letter name,” and were it not for the ascent of Malchut to Bina, it would not be possible to settle people in the world at all, as it is said, that that 18 letter name is appointed over the rains of good will, largess, blessing, and settling of the world.
Let the Waters Gather
66) “And God said, ‘Let the waters under the heaven be gathered together unto one place.’” “Gather” means that the Mochin, called “water,” will spread in a precise line in a way that they are straight and do not divert to the right or to the left.
In the order of elicitation of the Mochin from the first point, which is AA, everything comes out in concealment. First, the light is hidden in AA because he raises his Malchut under his Hochma and takes Bina outside the degree of the Rosh, which is the point of Holam, until the light reaches and gathers into the upper palace. “Reaches” means in Hochma, due to the point of Shuruk. “Gathers” means that the Hochma gathers and clothes inside the light of Hassadim through the point of Hirik into the upper palace, to YESHSUT, who is the second palace, caused by AA.
From YESHSUT the abundance comes out in a straight line that consists of right and left into ZA until it reaches the place that gathers everything in male and in female. This is the one who lives forever, Yesod de ZA, a male, who unites with Malchut, the female. Thus, he consists of male and female.
Explanation: The seven days of creation are HGT NHYM, each of which consists of all seven times in a way that there are seven Sefirot HGT NHYM in each day. This is why there is a big difference between each day because on the first day, which is Hesed and right line, although it consists of all seven Sefirot and of all the details in them, they are still all light of Hesed in it. In that regard they are all the clarifications of The Zohar on the first day.
Likewise, although the second day, Gevura and left line, consists of all seven Sefirot HGT NHYM, and all the details in them, they are still all in Gevura in it, and in dispute of the left with the right. They are all the clarifications of The Zohar on the second day.
Similarly, on the third day, Tifferet and the middle line, which decides and unites the two lines right and left in one another, although all seven Sefirot HGT NHYM are in it, as well as all the details in them, they are in it only in unification of right and left. Hence, all the clarifications of The Zohar here are only in unification.
This is why it was said, “Let the waters ... gather,” meaning that they would expand by way of a precise line in a way that they are straight, that he united the two lines and did not stray to the right or to the left. And from YESHSUT, he comes out in his unification to the rest of the degrees to unite the right and left of RTS  de ZA, until he reaches a place that gathers everything in male and female.
Commentary: the unification of right and left is completed only after they part into two Partzufim, where one is all right, and the other is all left, which are male and female. The male, Yesod, is built entirely from the right line, and the female, Malchut, is built entirely from the left line. In their Zivug, the unification of right and left is completed in the desired wholeness.
However, first there must be the unification of right and left by the middle line in a single Partzuf. This is why it was said “Until the light reaches and is gathered into the upper palace in YESHSUT, and in RTS de ZA.” And from YESHSUT, the abundance comes out in a straight line, in ZA, and then the Zivug of right and left in two separate Partzufim can be until he reaches one place that gathers everything in male and female to Yesod, who unites with Malchut, who is the unification in the two Partzufim.
67) The water comes out from above, from the first Hey of HaVaYaH, YESHSUT. Below the heaven is the tiny Vav, a small Vav, Yesod de ZA, since ZA is called “the big Vav” and his Yesod is called “little Vav.” This is why in the pronunciation of Vav, two letters Vav are heard—the first being heaven, ZA, and the second being below the heaven, Yesod de ZA. And then it is written, “And let the dry land be seen,” the bottom Hey, which appeared, while all the other degrees but her were covered.
Once the Mochin are drawn from the first Hey, Bina, to below the heaven, Yesod de ZA, it is written, “And let the dry land be seen,” the bottom Hey, Malchut, Nukva de ZA, for only that was revealed in regard to the dry land, but the rest of the degrees, besides her, were all covered and concealed.
Revealing means illumination of Hochma. Covering means concealing of the illumination of Hochma. Only the Malchut was revealed in illumination of Hochma, but the rest of the degrees above her were covered and there is no illumination of Hochma in them. And from the midst of that last degree, the bottom Hey, Malchut, that light which was covered was heard and appeared. Although in the verse, “And let the dry land be seen,” the bottom Hey appeared, and the rest of the degrees, besides her, were all covered, he reinterprets that it does not mean that all the degrees that preceded the land remained covered and concealed, but that they will be revealed again later through the land, Malchut.
68) “Unto one place” is Yesod. It is called so because it is the connection of the unification of the upper world, since in the verse, “The Lord is one and His name, One,’” two unifications are implied: 1) The upper world, unified in its degrees, is “The Lord is one.” 2) The lower world, unified in its degrees, is “And His name, One.”
The connection of the unification of the upper world, which is “The Lord is One,” is through the Yesod, the one who lives forever, who is mitigated there in Bina. The upper world is connected in His unification, hence the place is called “one,” since all the degrees and all the organs of Partzuf ZA gather there and all become one in him, without any separation whatsoever.
It is so because there are two merits in the unification of ZA in the upper world, Leah, who stands above his Chazeh, over his unification in the lower world, and Rachel, who stands from his Chazeh and below.
Above the Chazeh is GAR de ZA. GAR can receive Hochma everywhere, without clothing of light of Hassadim. Hence, the unification of the point of Shuruk means that the Hochma cannot clothe there due to lack of clothing of Hassadim. This does not blemish the Zivug of ZA with the upper world at all, for because they are GAR, they do not need clothing of Hassadim at all, and the Hochma dresses in them without Hassadim.
Hochma is not received above Chazeh de ZA for his own needs, as he is corrected there in the pure Avir of upper AVI, in Hassadim that are covered from Hochma. The Hochma that he does receive there is only for the lower world, Rachel, standing from his Chazeh and below. This is why the light of Hassadim does not stop in the upper world even during the unification of the point of Shuruk, for she does not need its illumination.
Thus, there are two merits in the upper world: 1) They can receive Hochma even without Hassadim. 2) It will not happen that they lack Hassadim.
But in the lower world, Rachel, who stands from his Chazeh and below, ZAT de ZA, and who lacks those two, she 1) cannot receive Hochma without clothing of Hassadim, and 2) even during the unification of the point of Shuruk, she remains empty of Hassadim because she needs his illumination. This is so because there is no wholeness whatsoever from Chazeh de ZA and below, unless in illumination of Hochma.
For this reason, the Zivug of ZA with the upper world is called “one place,” since all the degrees and all the organs gather there—all the degrees, the degrees of Hochma, as well as the degrees of Hassadim. It is so because they do not become diminished in Hassadim due to the illumination of Shuruk, and they can receive Hochma without Hassadim, as well. Also, all the organs means the Sefirot.
Through the illumination of the Shuruk, the three Sefirot, Bina and TM, are elevated from their fall. They return to their degree and all the lights and Kelim become one in him, without any separation whatsoever. There is not a degree that unites there in the illumination of Shuruk, the illumination of Hochma, in complete unification except that degree, meaning in the unification of ZA with the degree of the upper world, since the upper world can receive Hochma without the clothing of Hassadim.
All the lights are covered in it in a hidden manner, in one craving, only for light of Hassadim. From Chazeh and above, it is pure air, and the lights are covered there and blocked from Hochma, in a blocked manner, as they are blocked from receiving Hochma. They receive Hochma only for the lower world, which is why the unification is complete on all sides.
Thus far, in the words, “And let the dry land be seen,” the revealed world, Rachel, united with the hidden world, Leah, since the lower world, Rachel, was also included in the upper Zivug, ZA and Leah, from Chazeh and above. It is written about Rachel, who is included in them, “And let the dry land be seen,” for because Rachel is considered ZA, unfit for reception of Hochma without clothing of Hassadim, she becomes dry there, desolate, and empty of Hassadim and Hochma.
69) The revealed world, Rachel, the Nukva de ZA from his Chazeh and below, is also unified below. This is so because besides the revealed world, Rachel, being included in the Zivug of the upper world, Leah, from Chazeh de ZA and above, she has such a Zivug herself, as well, from Chazeh de ZA and below.
The revealed world is the lower world, Rachel, the bottom Nukva of ZA who stands from his Chazeh and below. “Vision” was said about her, as it is written, “I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne high and lifted up,” “And they saw the God of Israel.” It is also written, “And the glory of the Lord appeared in the tent of meeting,” “And feared the glory of the Lord.” “As the appearance of the bow ... so was the appearance of the brightness round about. This was the appearance of the image of the glory of the Lord.” He brings two verses with the name Et , and three verses with the name, “Glory of the Lord.” It is known that the bottom Nukva, Rachel, is called Et or “glory of the Lord.” Thus, only the lower world is the revealed world, in which there is vision.
But the upper world, Leah, the upper Nukva de ZA, is called “the hidden world” because she is concealed and unseen. It is written, “And let the dry land be seen,” referring to Rachel, the revealed world, which is included in the upper Zivug from Chazeh and above in the upper world. This is why vision is written in regard to her, “And let the dry land be seen.” If the verse spoke only of the Zivug of ZA and Leah above the Chazeh, called “upper unification,” it would not say “Be seen,” since there is no seeing in the upper world.
70) “As the appearance of the bow,” written about the Merkava  of Ezekiel, means the one who lives forever, Yesod de ZA. In the portion, Noah, it is written, “I have set My bow in the cloud.” There, too, it means Yesod de ZA, called “the one who lives forever.” “In the cloud” means in Malchut, the bottom Nukva de ZA, the revealed world, Rachel. “I have set ... in the cloud,” for since the day when the world was created, He set His bow in the cloud on a cloudy day, as it is written, “And it shall come to pass, when I bring clouds over the earth,” to indicate that only then did the bow appear as the image of the glory of the Lord, and not at another time.
That is, When the left awakens to overcome, when ZA and Rachel are included in YESHSUT, at the point of Shuruk on the left—Hochma without Hassadim—and Rachel remains empty even from Hochma, and cannot tolerate the emptiness, Rachel comes out of YESHSUT into her own Behina to extend the level of Hassadim on her own Masach, to clothe the Hochma. This is the unification of the point of Hirik. She has difficulty delivering because it is considered that Rachel is having difficulty while delivering the Mochin because her exit from the upper palace of YESHSUT into her own Behina is diminution and difficult for her, as it is written, “And she had hard labor,” since the Mochin are completed and born only upon her exit in the Hirik.
A bow is seen only on a cloudy day because there is wholeness of Mochin only at the point of Holam, the right line, but she needs the unification of the point of Shuruk and the point of Hirik, which are Dinim, and they are called “a cloudy day.”
Upon the birth of the Mochin, the three angels are with her: Michael on the right, Raphael in the middle, and Gabriel on the left. She receives their strength to deliver the Mochin because Michael extends to her from the Holam, right; Gabriel extends to her from the Shuruk, left; and Raphael extends to her from the Hirik, the middle one.
Those three Behinot are the colors that are seen in the image of the bow—red, white, and green. The right, which extends from the Holam, is the image of white in the bow. The left, which extends from the Shuruk, is the image of red in the bow. The middle, which extends from the Hirik, is the image of green in the bow. Those three colors are the revealed world, Rachel, in whom there is vision, and this is why it is written about her, “As the appearance of the bow,” vision.
71) “So was the appearance of the brightness round about.” The illumination was covered and concealed in the pupil of the eye in the vision of the eye. That is, there are four colors in the eye of the one who sees. It is primarily white, with red tendons inside of it, which are the red color. In its middle there is the color green, and inside of it, the pupil of the eye, which is the black color. However, in regard to the vision of the eye, there is dominion only to the pupil of the eye, which is the black in the eye. It is considered that the three colors, white, red, and green in the eye are covered and concealed when the eye sees due to the dominion of the black in the pupil of the eye.
It is so because the power of vision is only in the black. This indicates the upper unification, the opposite of the vision of the bow, which indicates the lower unification, for the image of the bow is the visible colors, and the image of the brightness is the illumination that was covered and concealed in the pupil of the eye, in the vision of the eye, since those three colors, white, red, and green, which are covered in the vision of the brightness, are seen in the image of the bow.
The verse, “This was the appearance of the image of the glory of the Lord,” concerns the colors in the image of the bow, and not the image of the brightness, since he unified the lower unification of the three colors of the bow, according to the unification that he unified in the upper unification. This is why it is “The appearance of the image of the glory of the Lord.” The text should not be interpreted as the image of the brightness, for it is illumination that was covered, and the colors are hidden there and are invisible in the pupil of the eye in the seeing of the eye.
Accordingly, “As the appearance of the bow that is in the cloud in the day of rain” indicates the lower unification, Rachel, the three colors that are seen—white, red, and green. Likewise, the image of the brightness round about indicates the upper unification because the image of the brightness means the illumination that was covered, and the hidden, unseen colors. The text compares the lower unification of the image of the bow to the upper unification of the image of the brightness to indicate that all the lights that were drawn out covered in the upper unification are drawn to the lower unification in the revealed. Also, those same three colors that are hidden in the pupil of the eye in the seeing of the eye are themselves the ones that appear in the image of the bow that will be in the day of rain. Therefore, the image of the bow is an appearance of the image of the glory of the Lord, as they are extended from the great, whole, and superior unification.
72) The three names, “The Lord our God, the Lord,” in “Hear O Israel” indicate the three colors—white, red, and green—when they are hidden and unseen. They connect unto one place, the first unification in the upper world, called “one place.” It is to that unification that the verse implies in the Merkava of Ezekiel, “So was the appearance of the brightness round about.”
There are images in the bow in the unification below, to unite in them. They are white, red, and green, corresponding to the three hidden colors that are in the upper unification, “The Lord our God, the Lord.” Those colors of the bow are one unification, as it is written, “And His name, ‘One,’” the lower unification. This is “Blessed be the name of the glory of His kingdom forever and ever” that we say after “Hear O Israel,” the lower unification.
The upper unification, “Hear O Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord is one,” corresponds to the lower unification, “Blessed be the name of the glory of His kingdom forever and ever.” There are six words in “Hear O Israel” , and those six words in the two unifications indicate the unification of VAK de Gadlut.
73) “Let the waters gather” means a measurement of a line and a measure. A measure is because of the harsh spark in Bina, as it is written, “Who has measured the waters in the hollow of his hand.” Who  is Bina. When Bina raises Malchut to her, in the association of Midat ha Rachamim with Din, Bina is not called Elokim, but only MI, since then the letters ELEH of Elokim fall to ZON. It follows that then Bina herself is diminished into VAK without a Rosh. She measures the Mochin de ZON in this measure, too. MI is Bina when she raises Malchut to her. “Measured in his hand” means measuring water in this raising, the Mochin de ZON.
This is why it is written, “Let the waters gather,” since by Bina’s measuring of the Mochin de Katnut de ZON, she has the ability to subsequently impart the Mochin de Gadlut, as well. “Let the waters gather” is the full amount of Mochin of the maker of the worlds, ZA, implied in the name HaVaYaH filled with Alephs: Yod-Vav-Dalet Hey-Aleph Vav-Aleph-Vav Hey-Aleph. The whole Gadlut of the Mochin de ZA are implied in HaVaYaH filled with Alephs, and their measure depends on the verse, “Let the waters gather,” which means measuring the measuring line of Bina in MI. Were it not for that measuring, it would be impossible for ZA to receive Mochin de Gadlut, for because they received the Katnut from Bina, they are also worthy of receiving the Gadlut of Bina. This is the meaning of “Let the waters gather unto one place,” the measuring of the measure of Katnut and Gadlut from Bina to ZON.
74) “Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts, the whole earth is full of His glory.” The three times “Holy” in the verse is as it is written, “Let the waters gather,” which is the three Mochin in Bina. The waters come out from above, from the first Hey. “The Lord of hosts” is as it is written, “Unto one place,” Yesod de ZA, who is called “the one who lives forever,” to whom the Mochin from Bina are extended. “The whole earth is full of His glory” is as it is written, “And let the dry land be seen,” the bottom Hey, the revealed world when she is included in the unification of the upper world, the engraved name of the unification, KOZO BaMOChSaZ KOZO, which is the subsequent letters to the name HaVaYaH Elokeinu HaVaYaH, where the letters subsequent to HaVaYaH are KOZO, and the ones subsequent to Elokeinu are BaMOChSaZ.
The verse, “And let the dry land be seen” is the engraved name of the unification KOZO BaMOChSaZ KOZO, since the dry land, the revealed world, is included in the unification of the upper world, HaVaYaH Elokeinu HaVaYaH .
Nukva de ZA, called “the revealed world,” is implied in the verse, “The whole earth is full of His glory” only when she is called KOZO BaMOChSaZ KOZO. When she is included in the unification of the upper world, “The Lord our God, the Lord.” This is opposite the time when the Nukva descends from there to her own place, in the lower unification. At that time she is not “The whole earth is full of His glory,” since then she illuminates only from the BYA in her, from her Chazeh and below.
Let the Earth Put Forth Grass
75) “Let the earth put forth grass” is a high unification, since now it reveals her power in those waters that were gathered unto one place. All the power, the Mochin, that the Nukva de ZA received in the upper unification when she was included there, as it is written, “And let the dry land be seen,” she brings them out when she descends to her place from Chazeh de ZA and below in the lower unification. At that time, in relation to her being dry, she becomes a land that bears fruit and offspring.
This is so because when she was included in the upper unification, as it is written, “And let the dry land be seen,” she was desolate and dry, and was unfit for illuminating to the settling of the world. But in the bottom unification she becomes a land that bears fruit and offspring, as it should be for the settling of the world, as it is written, “Let the earth put forth grass, herb yielding seed.” The Mochin are extended within her in a hidden and concealed manner, and high and hidden souls and holy hosts come out and are born within her, where all those faithful righteous correct and extend them in the corrections of the faith, in MAN, in the work of God.
Two kinds of Mochin are extended in the bottom unification in the Nukva by her Hitkalelut  in the upper unification: 1) in a hidden and concealed manner, when they are not revealed to the lower ones at all; 2) in revealed Mochin, when souls and angels for the world are born and come out of her.
76) It is as it is written, “Who causes the hay to grow for the cattle, and herb for the work of man.” This is because this beast lies on a thousand mountains, and each day that hay is grown for her. A beast is an appellation of Malchut when she is devoid of Mochin de GAR. Lying means that she lacks the three Kelim NHY, called “legs,” like a lying bird whose legs are unseen, only the body. Likewise, when Malchut has only six Kelim, HBD HGT, lacking the three bottom ones, NHY, she is called “lying” because her NHY disappear.
The number 1,000 indicates Mochin de Hochma, whose Sefirot number 1,000, as it is written, “And I will teach you wisdom” . Mountains are an appellation for the three Sefirot HGT, as we learn that there are no mountains but the fathers, HGT. NHY are called “sons,” and they are called “hills.” Hay is an appellation for angels who are born from her Mochin de GAR that the righteous extend to her each day through the MAN that they raise to her with their good deeds.
Explanation: One of the primary corrections in the world of correction after the breaking of the vessels was the concealment of inner AVI, who operated in the world of Nekudim, for because of their great illumination, the Parsa below Atzilut was cancelled and the Kelim descended to BYA, broke, and died. By the concealment of the Zivug of inner AVI, there is no longer illumination of GAR de AB in the Mochin of ABYA, only Mochin de VAK de AB, extended from the outer AVI de AB. Mochin de AB are Mochin de Hochma. Those GAR de Mochin are called “inner AVI” or GAR de AB, and those VAK de Mochin are called “outer AVI” or VAK de AB.
For this reason, the HGT of each Partzuf is in covered Hassadim, in which there is no light of Hochma because the three Sefirot HGT through the Chazeh are GAR of the Guf, and the Sefirot TNHYM from the Chazeh down are VAK de Guf. And because the Mochin de GAR de AB depart from each Partzuf and do not illuminate, the GAR de Guf, HGT, are devoid of Hochma, but are in covered Hassadim. And because the Mochin de VAK de AB clothe and illuminate in the Partzuf, VAK of the Kelim de Guf, TNHYM from the Chazeh and below illuminate in illumination of Hochma, in disclosed Hassadim.
It is written about those Mochin de AB, “Leaping on the mountains, jumping on the hills,” since mountains are HGT, on which the Mochin de AB leap, skipping them and not clothing in them because they need GAR de AB and they are hidden from the rest of the Partzuf. The Mochin de AB jump and come upon the hills, TNHYM from the Chazeh and below, for because they are Kelim de VAK they have these Mochin, since VAK de AB remain and illuminate. Thus, he leaps and skips the mountains, and jumps specifically on the hills, which are TNHYM.
However, this does not mean that the Mochin came out in a Zivug of VAK without GAR, since in Mochin de AB, VAK cannot come out without GAR. Rather, from the beginning of the Zivug, a complete level of AB extends to each Partzuf, GAR and VAK, but the Mochin de GAR de AB return and come out of the Partzuf, and only the Mochin de VAK de AB remain clothed in the Partzuf. Offspring come out of each Zivug, even from Mochin de GAR de AB, which extend only at the beginning of the Zivug, and promptly disappear.
Accordingly, there are two kinds of offspring from the Zivug of ZON to Mochin de AB: 1) the ones who emerge at the beginning of the Zivug from GAR de AB. These are called “hay,” which are angels that rule for a time because they must be cancelled immediately with the concealment of the Mochin de GAR de AB from which they were born. 2) The Mochin de VAK de AB that remain in each Partzuf, and are called “Herb yielding seed.”
This is why it was said, “A beast that lies on a thousand mountains.” A beast is the Nukva de ZA, which in regard to 1,000, which mean Mochin de Hochma, she lies on the mountains, HGT, meaning she is devoid of GAR, as it is written, “Leaping on the mountains.” Yet, each day that hay is raised for her, and that hay is those angels that rule for a time. It is so because the righteous raise MAN each day for a Zivug of ZON for Mochin de AB. It is considered that each day, that hay is raised for her, since in the beginning of the Zivug, the GAR de AB come out, as well, and their offspring are called “hay,” meaning angels who rule for a time.
However, they must promptly disappear because the GAR de AB come out of the Partzuf. Their dominion extends from the left line, created on the second day, and they wish to annul the right line with their rule, like the left line that was created on the second day. They are poised to be food for that beast, for nothing extends from their illumination to the lower ones, but the Nukva herself enjoys them during their rule. Afterwards she burns them and cancels them because fire consumes fire. The dominion of the left is called “fire,” which are the angels. The Nukva, with her illumination of the left, is also called “fire.” When she cancels the angels, she is regarded as fire that consumes fire.
77) “And herb for the work of man” indicates the Ophanim, the animals, and the cherubim. Ophanim are angels in Assiya, animals are the angels in Yetzira, and cherubim are the angels in Beria. All those angels extend from VAK of the Mochin de AB, hence they are sustainable, unlike those who are called “hay,” who extend from GAR de AB, who rule only for a time and promptly burn.
All of them, the Ophanim, the animals, and the cherubim are corrected and clothed within their corrections, which are on the part of the Emanator Himself. They are poised to be corrected further when people come to the work of their Master with their offerings and prayer. It is so because this is the work of man, and that grass was intended for man’s work from the beginning, to be corrected in the correction of man, as it should be.
78) When they are corrected in that work of man, nourishments and prey then come out of them to the world, as it is written, “To bring forth bread from the earth,” and as it is written, “Herb yielding seed,” which is the Mochin de VAK de AB, which is not hay, which is GAR de AB, for hay does not yield seeds but is intended to be consumed by the fire of the Kedusha of the Nukva. But the herb is for the correction of the world because it yields seed.
79) All of that is to bring forth bread from the earth, since all the corrections that were given to people are only to correct that herb that comes out of the earth, who is the Nukva. The work of people toward their Maker is to provide through them pray and nourishments to this world out of that earth, so that people are blessed by the blessings of above.
Although the Mochin of the hay are GAR de AB, and Mochin of the herb are VAK de AB, still, man’s work in offerings and prayer to extend Mochin and abundance is only on the Mochin of herb, and not on Mochin of hay, since the Mochin of hay are not imparted to the worlds at all, but are for the nourishments of the Nukva. All that is imparted upon the worlds is only from the Mochin of herb, so that all of man’s work in raising MAN and extending abundance from above is only for extension of Mochin of herb, which are VAK de AB, and not Mochin of hay, which are GAR de AB.
It is written, “Who causes the hay to grow for the cattle.” Hay is for the Nukva herself, who is called “a beast,” HaVaYaH filled with the letters Hey, which in Gematria is Behemah , 52. “And herb for the work of man.” Only the herb was given for the work of man, to bring forth bread out of the earth.
80) “A fruit tree bearing fruit” is two degrees, male and female. A fruit tree is the Nukva de ZA. “Bearing fruit” is Yesod de ZA, a male. He is called “Bearing fruit” because all those fruits that the Nukva begets come to her from the male. Thus, the male is the one who makes the fruits in the Nukva, hence he is called “Bearing fruit.”
As the fruit tree, the Nukva, brings forth the force that she received from the fruit bearing tree, the male, she also elicits her own power. There are special offspring to the fruit tree, the Nukva, which are not in the “Bearing fruit,” the male, by the force of the Nukva herself, the cherubim and the pillars that come from her own Behina. What are the pillars? They are those who rise in the smoke of the offering and are corrected with the offering. They are called “pillars of smoke,” as it is written, “Who is this who comes up from the desert like pillars of smoke?” The cherubim correspond to the herb that she received from the male, and the pillars of smoke correspond to the hay that she received from the male.
Whenever Israel were righteous, the cherubim were attached to one another in Dvekut Panim be Panim. The smoke of the offering when Israel were righteous would rise up straight, not leaning to the right or to the left. It was said here that cherubim Panim be Panim, which is big Panim, and the smoke of the offering that rises up straight at that time, extend from the power of the Nukva herself, the bottom Hey de HaVaYaH, which is the face of a man, and not by the force of the male, who is Yod-Hey-Vav, the face of a lion. All of them, the cherubim and the pillars, stand in their corrections for man’s work.
Hay does not stand so because it is meant for eating. This is so because there is a difference between smelling and eating. The smell rises from below upward and does not spread downward, while eating expands from above downward. It was said that although the pillars of smoke are Mochin that extend from GAR de AB like the hay, they still remain standing and existing for man’s work by the force of their correction, and they are not cancelled. They are corrected through the work of the offerings, which burns the offering in the fire and raises the smoke for a sweet savor from below upward. It does not reach the lower ones, and by that they exist and are not cancelled.
But the Mochin of the hay, which are intended for eating, expand from above downward, like eating. This is why they are cancelled and are not sustained, since those Mochin are unfit to expand below to the lower ones.
81) “A fruit tree bearing fruit” indicates the forms of male and female, whose faces are the image of the face of a man. “A fruit tree” is Nukva de ZA. “Bearing fruit” is Yesod de ZA, a male, who makes fruits in her. Those male and female are not like the cherubim, implied in the herb yielding seed, since those are big Panim, marked with a beard, while cherubim are small Panim, like the face of infants. Panim  means GAR and Mochin. Big Panim are Mochin de Gadlut that are received from the 13 qualities of Rachamim in AA, who is called Dikna de AA. This is why it said, “Panim marked with a beard.” It is also called Mazal . Small Panim, however, are Mochin de Katnut.
All the shapes are included in a man’s face—lion, ox, and eagle—since they are big Panim, for big Panim are Mochin de Gadlut and GAR, and are not received by the Nukva when she has only six Sefirot HBD HGT, and lacks the four Sefirot NHYM. Rather, once she raises her NHYM from BYA and is complemented with ten Sefirot de Kelim, she mates with ZA and receives from him Mochin de Gadlut.
There are two raisings: 1) First, she raises NHY without Malchut. At that time she has only GAR de VAK, which are Mochin de Katnut. 2) Next, when she raises the Malchut, too, called “a man’s face,” she obtains Mochin de Gadlut.
Those NHYM that she raises from BYA are called “four animals,” which carry the throne to ZA for a Zivug, for without them the throne, Nukva de ZA, would be lacking in the ten Sefirot of the Kelim and would not be fit for a Zivug. The Sefira Netzah is the face of a lion, Hod is the face of an ox, Yesod is the face of an eagle, and Malchut is the face of a man.
All the shapes are included in the face of a man because the face of a man are big Panim, and carved shapes are engraved in them, as the carvings of the explicit name in the four directions of the world. Through the face of a man, the three animals also acquire big Panim, HB TM in Mochin de Gadlut, implied in the name HaVaYaH in his four letters: Yod being Hochma and south, Hey being Bina and north, Vav being ZA and east, and the bottom Hey being Malchut and west. This is why it is considered that all the shapes—lion, eagle, and ox—which are NHY, are included in the face of a man, Malchut, for besides the face of a man, by raising NHY without Malchut they are still in Panim of Katnut, in Mochin de VAK.
82) Michael inscribed an inscription to the south, and all three faces—the face of a lion, the face of an ox, and the face of an eagle—look to the face of a man. “Inscribed an inscription” means that he allots the place of the Zivug. South is right, for extending light of covered Hassadim. Looking means receiving by their looking.
At the time of Gadlut, when the Nukva de ZA raises Malchut to her from BYA, called “the face of a man,” the Zivug of ZON is done on that Malchut from the right, south, and the level of Mochin de Gadlut extends on her. Then, all three Panim—lion, ox, and eagle—receive the Mochin de Gadlut from that Malchut, who is called “the face of a man.” It follows that all three Panim look to the face of a man and receive from those Panim. Michael is one of the four angels serving Nukva de ZA. Hence, he inscribes and prepares the place of the Zivug, and he is the angel of Hesed. This is why he inscribes to the south side, right, Hesed.
A man is male and female, and only they are called “man.” Malchut in and of herself, when she is not in a Zivug with ZA, is not called “man,” since she is without a male. Only when she mates with ZA are both of them called “man,” as it is written, “He created them male and female, and blessed them, and called their name Adam , on the day when they were created.” Thus, both together are called “man,” but each one for himself is like half a body, and he is not called “man.”
Out of him means from the face of a man in a Zivug to the south side, were the depictions depicted, as it is written, “The vehicle of God are myriads, thousands upon thousands,” which is the lower Merkava, called “The vehicle of God.” Depictions means the measures born from the Zivug, since each level has its own depiction according to the quality of the Zivug de Hakaa.
Explanation: Those four animals—man, lion, ox, and eagle—are called Merkava , since they are the four Sefirot NHYM that rise from BYA and connect to the Nukva de ZA to complement her ten Sefirot so she is fit for a Zivug. Since without them she would not be fit for a Zivug, it is considered that the Nukva rides on these four animals, and they became a Merkava to her, for they carry her to the Zivug.
However, there are two Merkavot for two Zivugim. They are called “upper Merkava” and “lower Merkava.” There is a big difference between them because in the upper Merkava there are four animals—man, lion, ox, and eagle—and in the lower Merkava there are only three animals—ox, eagle, and lion. There is no man in them in particular, but only by way of Hitkalelut.
We should understand why the animals divided to became two Merkavot for two Zivugim, and why one Zivug is not enough, and why the face of a man in particular is missing in the bottom Merkava. The thing is that it is known that there are only nine Sefirot in AA de Atzilut. Following him, it is likewise in all the Partzufim of ABYA. It is so because Malchut is deficient, since she was concealed in the Rosh of Partzuf Atik and did not extend to AA. This is only one of the main corrections that were done in the world of correction. However, it does not mean that all ten Sefirot in Malchut are missing, since there is Zivug only in the Masach in Malchut. Rather, only Malchut de Malchut is missing, but the first nine of Malchut remained in the Partzufim.
Therefore, when she was sorted and rose to the Nukva, her Malchut from BYA—which is the face of a man—only the first nine of Malchut rose to her, since Malchut de Malchut was missing. Thus, the first nine in each Partzuf are above its Chazeh, and below its Chazeh it is regarded as Malchut of the Partzuf. It therefore follows that there is the face of a man, Malchut that rises from BYA, only from the Chazeh and above, only the first nine of Malchut, which end at the place of the Chazeh. But from the Chazeh and below, where there is Malchut de Malchut, there is no face of a man there because Malchut de Malchut was concealed in the Rosh of Partzuf Atik and does not appear in the worlds.
It is known that each Behina ascends to its corresponding Behina in the upper one. Therefore, she rose to the Chazeh and above of the face of a man, to from Chazeh and above of ZON, and the complete Zivug of the face of a man was done only in their from Chazeh and above. This is why Michael inscribed an inscription to the south, and all three Panim look to the face of a man, since the Zivug from Chazeh and above is called “south,” “the right side,” “light of covered Hassadim.”
Michael inscribes the place of the Zivug only from Chazeh and above because he did not rise more than the face of a man, Malchut, only the first nine, ascribed only to from Chazeh and above, and not from Chazeh and below. Here, in from Chazeh and above, the Zivug is complete in all four animals NHYM, called “face of a man,” face of a lion,” face of an ox,” and “face of an eagle.” They are called “the upper Merkava” because they carry the Nukva for the upper Zivug of from Chazeh and above, and because they are all from Chazeh and above of each of the four animals.
However, the three worlds BYA, as well as NRN of people, cannot receive their abundance from the Zivug of from Chazeh and above because they are related to the Sefirot of from Chazeh and below of ZON. Therefore, once the complete Zivug de ZON was done in from Chazeh and above, in the upper Merkava, the from Chazeh and below of the three animals—lion, ox, and eagle—also rises, and they are included in the upper Zivug of from Chazeh and above of ZON, receiving the abundance from the face of a man that is there. They descend and impart to the children of the three worlds BYA, and those three animals are called “the bottom Merkava,” as they are from Chazeh and below.
It was said that the depictions were depicted from him, as it is written, “The vehicle of God are myriads, thousands upon thousands,” since the animals of the bottom Merkava were depicted from the upper Zivug on the south, as it is written, “The vehicle of God are myriads, thousands upon thousands,” since the animals in the Merkava are called Shinan .
83) The name Shinan includes all the depictions, all the animals, which are Shor , Nesher , Arieh . This is the acronym Shina of Shinan. The letter Nun of Shinan implies the face of a man that is included in them. The Nun is an expansion of male and female that are mingled as one, since the face of a man is missing in them themselves, as they are from the Chazeh and below, from which Malchut is missing. But since they rise and become included in the upper Zivug from Chazeh and above, they receive from the face of a man from there. This is why it is implied in a Nun and not in the initial letter like the other three animals, since they have no particular face of a man, but rather an expansion and inclusion from the face of a man above the Chazeh.
All of them, all that is in BYA, come out from those animals, which are Shinan. The forms in BYA are born and depart from them, each in his own Behina as is appropriate for it. The three worlds BYA and all that is in them are ascribed to from Chazeh and below of ZON. For this reason, they cannot receive from the upper Merkava from Chazeh and above of ZON. Instead, they must receive from the animals in the bottom Merkava, which are Shinan that are ascribed to their Behina, as they are from Chazeh and below of ZON.
84) Those animals are incorporated and mingled in one another so that each will be included in the other. That is, the four animals, Shinan, are incorporated in one another in a way that the face of an ox consists of the four animals, the face of an eagle consists of the four animals, and the face of a lion consists of the four animals. Each has four Panim, Shinan, and they are 12 Panim. However, they are not 16 Panim because they do not have a particular face of a man; it is in them only by Hitkalelut, to the extent that it is included and incorporated in the three animals. This is why they are 12 Panim.
The animals, Shinan, are conducted in the four carved names, as it is written, “The great, mighty, terrible God.” They rise to them to be conducted and to look. To be conducted means for Mochin de VAK. To look means for Mochin de GAR. Those four names are carved in the four animals in the upper Merkava above Chazeh de ZON, and the animals in the bottom Merkava, below the Chazeh, who have no Zivug in their place because they are lacking the face of a man, must rise to the four names above and receive Mochin de VAK and GAR from the upper Zivug that is there.
85) The ox rises to be conducted and to look to the face of a man. A name rises, crowns, and is carved in two colors. This is the name “God,” since those animals below have no Zivug in their place because the face of a man is missing in them. Instead, they must rise up to the upper Merkava to receive from the Zivug of the face of a man that is there, the Mochin de GAR and de VAK.
Here The Zohar explains the ascent of each animal to the face of a man in the upper Merkava, and its unification with the names that are there. It says, “When the ox, the left of the animals, rises to the upper Zivug in the upper Merkava, to receive VAK and GAR from the face of a man that is there, it does not rise to the name “mighty” that is there, to the left line. Rather, it ascends to the name “God” that is there, on the right line, since there is no correction for the left, except in the Hassadim on the right.” It follows that the name “God” is crowned and carved with two colors—white color from itself, and red color from the ox included in it.
Then, once the ox has been included in the name “God,” it returns back, remaining only in Mochin de VAK—called Mochin of Achor , the throne, Nukva de ZA, carves and decorates it—and is inscribed by it to be conducted by the name “God.” That is, although the ox is left, and its way is in Dinim and Gevurot, it is still conducted in Hassadim in the name “God” because Midat ha Din in it has already been mitigated.
86) The eagle ascends to be conducted and to look at the face of a man. Another name rises, crowns, and is carved with two Panim and in two colors, the face of a man and the face of an eagle. The color of the right is white, and the color of the eagle is green, to be conducted and to look in a manner of ascent, in the crown of above, and it is great. Crowns means Mochin de GAR. Carved means Mochin de VAK. Conducted and looking means Mochin de GAR and Mochin de VAK.
When the eagle, the middle line of the animals below, rose to the upper Zivug in the upper Merkava to receive from there Mochin de VAK and Mochin de GAR, called “conduct” and “looking,” the name “great” that is there rises opposite it, and the eagle is included in it, receiving from it Mochin de VAK and de GAR. The name “great,” the level of Gadlut in the upper Merkava, stands there in the right. Although the Hochma, GAR, extends and stands in the left line at the point of Shuruk, still, the two lines—right and left—are included in one another in a Zivug through the middle line, which decides and sustains the illumination of them both, in a way that the Hassadim on the right will illuminate from above downward, and the illumination of Hochma on the left will illuminate from below upward.
At that time, the two lines are included in one another because the right is included in the illumination of Hochma on the left, and acquires the name, “great,” the left is included in the illumination of Hassadim on the right, and Hochma clothes in Hassadim. Thus, although Gadlut is primarily in the left, the Gadlut still extends only from the right line as it illuminates from above downward and reaches the lower ones, and not from the left because it illuminates from below upward and its illumination does not extend to the lower ones.
This is why the ox is included only in the name “God,” and not in the name “great,” as in itself, it is the left line, whose Mochin are extended only from below upward. But the eagle, the middle line, which can illuminate from above downward, rose and was included in the right, receiving the Gadlut in the name “great,” because it can illuminate to the lower ones, as it was said, “To be conducted and to look in a manner of ascent, in the crown of above.”
The Zohar interprets how the eagle receives the Gadlut from the left line through the right line. It says that it ascends to “Be conducted and to look in a manner of ascent, in the crown of above,” since the Hochma extended through the left line is the crown of above, as “crown” means Mochin de GAR, as it is written, “Go forth, O daughters of Zion, and gaze upon king Solomon, upon the crown with which his mother has crowned him.” It illuminates only in a manner of ascent, from below upward.
When it is conducted and looks at the crown that illuminates in a manner of ascent on the left, the right is included in the left, and receives the illumination of the crown that is there, then it acquires the name “great,” then turns back, the throne carves and decorates it, and it is inscribed by it to be conducted by the name “God.” Then, after the above mentioned Hitkalelut, the eagle returns to Mochin de VAK, Mochin de Achor, the throne, Nukva, carves and decorates it, and the eagle is inscribed to be conducted in that name. That is, the qualities of the eagle will be as the qualities of the name “great,” which is right and Hassadim.
87) The lion ascends to be conducted and to look at the face of a man above. Another name ascends opposite it, crowns and carves in two Panim and in two colors, to be strengthened and connected in Gevura. This is the name “mighty.” Then, after the Hitkalelut, it turns back to Mochin de VAK, and the throne, Nukva de ZA, carves and decorates it, and it is inscribed to be conducted in the name “mighty.” That is, its qualities will be of the lion, right, as the qualities of the name “mighty,” and he will be conducted by the quality of Gevura.
When the lion, right line and Hassadim, rose from the lower order to the upper Zivug in the upper Merkava from Chazeh de ZON and above, to receive from there Mochin de VAK and de GAR, called “conduct” and “looking,” the name “mighty” ascends opposite it, the left line that is there. The lion is included in it and receives Mochin de VAK and de GAR through it.
However, the ox and the eagle could not be included in the left line because they themselves are also included with the quality of the left, as it is written, “And the face of an ox on the left side of the four of them.” Likewise, the eagle, the middle line, contains right and left. If it were in the left of above, the quality of left would overcome it. Thus, only the lion, who is entirely from the right line, can rise to the left line of above, where there is illumination of Hochma, receive its qualities, and return them to his own right.
88) The face of a man looks at all the animals, and all of them rise and look at it. This is so because they all rose to the face of a man of above in the upper Merkava, since below there is no face of a man in them. Then, all of them were depicted in their carvings in this depiction in one name, called “terrible.” A depiction means a certain level. Carvings are Kelim, and depicted is the elicitation of the level by the Zivug de Hakaa related to it.
When the animals ascend to the face of a man, Malchut, in the upper Merkava, receiving from there the level of Gadlut by their looking at one another, they receive from there the name “terrible.” It is so because Malchut is called “fear,” and her male is called “terrible,” as it is written, “And God made it that He will be feared.”
Then it is written, “And the image of their faces was as the face of a man.” It is so because all the animals, Shina, are included in the image of a man, and that image includes them, as it is written, “They had the image of a man, and each had four faces.” It is so because the three animals are included in one another, and also included in the face of a man of above. Thus, each animal has four Panim, Shinan, which are 12 Panim.
89) This is why the Creator is called “The great, and mighty, and terrible God,” since those names are carved above, in the upper Merkava, included in the four letters of the name HaVaYaH, the name that includes all the names. The Hitkalelut of the ox of below with the lion of above is Yod de HaVaYaH, the name “God.” The Hitkalelut of the lion of below with the ox of above is Hey de HaVaYaH, the name “mighty.” The Hitkalelut of the eagle of below with the lion of above is Vav de HaVaYaH, the name “great,” and the face of a man of above—included in all the animals of below that rose to it—is the bottom Hey de HaVaYaH, the name “terrible.”
The order of the animals of the lower Merkava is different from the order of the animals in the upper Merkava, since the order in the upper Merkava is man, lion, ox, and eagle, and in the lower Merkava, the order is ox, eagle, lion, and man, like the acronym, Shinan. This is so because from the right side, where there is HaVaYaH, this is the order of the four animals—man, lion, eagle, and ox, where the ox, Gevura, is last. The animals of the other side, which are the damages on the left, are arranged in this manner: ox, eagle, lion, and man, which is Shinan.
It is written, “The vehicle of God are myriads, thousands upon thousands,” which are Shinan. It is known that the upper Merkava is right, and the bottom Merkava is left. The reason for the difference is that the animals of below have no Zivug in their place. Instead, they receive from the Zivug of above. For this reason, before the ox is mitigated in its ascent to the right, no animal can rise there because the multitude Dinim in the ox detain them. Hence, the ox ascends first, then the eagle, the middle line, in whom there is left, as well, which must first be mitigated, and in the end, the lion ascends to the left of above. Then, all are included in the face of a man of above, and this is why the order changed to Shinan.
Those forms, Shinan, are carved and decorated in the throne, Nukva de ZA. The throne is carved and embroidered with them because the name combinations and levels within one another are called embroidering. It is similar to one who embroiders two forms that are different from one another over the two sides of the canvas—on the one side a lion, and on the other side an ox, and so forth. And since those names and animals came out in the throne in the two Panim and colors together, it is called embroidering, that the throne is embroidered with them.
They were embroidered one to the right and one to the left, one to the front, and one to the back. They are inscribed to the four directions of the world: the face of a lion is inscribed to the right, south; the face of an ox on the left is the north, the face of an eagle from before, the east, and the face of a man from behind, the west. They are also the four letters HaVaYaH because Yod-Hey is south and north, right and left, and Vav-Hey is east and west, Panim and Achor.
90) When the throne, Nukva de ZA, ascends for a Zivug with ZA, it is inscribed in four forms, Shinan. Those four upper names carry that throne for a Zivug with ZA, and those four animals that unite with the four names, “The great, mighty, and terrible God,” are NHYM of the Nukva that were sorted and rose from BYA, connecting and complementing ten Sefirot for her, for the Nukva to be fit for a Zivug with ZA. When she lacks the Sefirot NHYM, she is unfit for a Zivug. This is why those animals, the four Sefirot NHYM, are regarded as carrying the throne. They are also called “a Merkava for the Nukva.”
It was said that those four upper names carry that throne for a Zivug with ZA. This is because without them, the Nukva, the throne, would lack her Sefirot NHY. When they rise to her and connect in her, they carry her for a Zivug, and the throne, the Nukva, is included in them during the Zivug. That is, she is complemented by those names, since they are NHYM that complement her ten Sefirot until the throne receives and gathers Nefashot  and delightful pleasures in the Zivug of ZA. Once she receives and gathers those pleasures and delights, she descends full, like a tree full of branches and fruits on all sides.
91) Once the throne descends from the place of Zivug to her own place, from Chazeh and below, those four forms, the four animals Shinan, come out depicted each in its depiction: carved, illuminating, glimmering, and blazing, and they sow a seed in the world.
Carved means the measures of Kelim for a receptacle.
Illuminating means the measures of the levels of Ohr Yashar.
Glimmering means measures of levels of Ohr Hozer.
Blazing means illumination from below upward, like the fire that blazes from below upward. These are illuminations of the left.
They also sow a seed in the world. That is, all the generations in the three worlds BYA are imparted by them. Then the four animals are called Shinan, as it is written, “Herb yielding seed.” “Herb” means the animals, which sow a seed in the world.
92) When the form of a man—which includes all the forms—comes out, it is written about it, “A fruit tree bearing fruit.” It is so because man is male and female. A fruit tree is a female, and bearing fruit is a male. It is written, “Whose seed is in it, on the earth,” meaning that it emitted its seed only for the benefit of the earth. “Whose seed is in it” means that man is forbidden to extract seed from it in vain.
93) “Grass” in the verse, “Let the earth put forth grass,” does not yield seed. This is why it is cancelled and is not sustained like the others. It is so because the hay is the angels that rule for a time, who were created on the second day. They stand as food for the beast. Grass and hay are one and the same, since the grass has no image to be depicted and carved in an image or depiction in any way. Rather, they are seen and not seen.
This is so because image and depiction come from the Kelim, since the lights take no changes from the beginning of the line through the end of Assiya. All the changes and forms come only from the Kelim, while the lights, which are called hay or grass, are GAR de AB, and have no Kelim in the worlds ABYA, since their Kli is revealed only in the inner AVI of the world of Nekudim. Also, it is known that those AVI were concealed and are no longer revealed in the worlds ABYA, hence GAR de AB have no Kli in anything.
This is why they are seen and not seen. They are necessarily seen in order to disclose the Mochin de VAK de AB, Mochin de Haya, for it is impossible for VAK to be disclosed without GAR. Once the Mochin have been disclosed they promptly part and are not seen because they have no Kelim in which to clothe. This is the rule: All those who were not depicted in a form and an image in the Kelim are not sustained. Rather, they are created and stand for a time, and are promptly consumed by the fire that consumes fire. Then they are once again created and promptly eaten by the fire that consumes fire as before, and so forth repeatedly each day.
94) A man below, in this world, has an image and a depiction, and still does not exist forever like the angels of above. This seemingly means that existence does not depend on an image and a depiction whatsoever. Rather, the image and the depiction of the angels of above are depicted in their depictions as they are, without being depicted through another clothing. This is why they live and exist forever. The depiction of man below, in this world, his NRN are depicted in their depictions through a clothing and not in some other way. For this reason they exist only for a set and allotted time.
The angels come from Zivug AVI. As AVI receive their lights in their own Kelim, without any clothing, the angels, who extend from them, can also receive their lights in their Kelim, and do not need assistance from another clothing. But the souls of people come from Zivug ZON de Atzilut, and it is known that ZON can receive their lights only through a clothing, which they receive from NHY de AVI, since their Kelim are unfit for Ohr Yashar, but only for Ohr Hozer.
It is even more so with people who are born from them—those are unfit to receive the lights in their own Kelim, but only through a clothing from ZON. Thus, they do not exist forever because “There is not a righteous man on earth who will not sin.” When they blemish the upper clothing until it is no longer fit for its role, their NRN promptly depart and they die.
95) Each night, when a man is asleep, the man’s spirit strips off that clothing and rises up for MAN to ZON. And the fire that consumes fire, Nukva de ZA, consumes and burns the spirit. Then the spirits are revived as before and are depicted in their clothes. This is why the spirits are not sustained, like those forms of above, the angels of the herb, but rather burn and are renewed, as it is written, “They are new every morning; great is Your faith,” written about people’s spirits, which are new each day. It is so because during sleep, the spirits rise up and burn, and are renewed because “Great is Your faith,” which is great, big, and not small.
Two kinds of angels come out from Zivug ZON: 1) angels called “grass,” which extend from GAR de AB, coming out for a time and promptly burn in the Nukva, and 2) angels that are called “herb,” which extend from VAK de AB and are sustained.
There is no Zivug in ZON except by MAN that people raise. During sleep, the righteous raise their spirits in MAN for Zivug ZON, as it is written, “In Your hand I commit my spirit; You have redeemed me Lord, a true God.”
Accordingly, two kinds of spirits should have been elicited through those MAN: 1) unsustainable, which promptly burn, like angels of the grass, 2) sustainable, like the angels of the herb. However, it is not so because only one spirit was extended to them, which first burns, and is then renewed and sustained.
Those two kinds of Mochin, GAR de AB and VAK de AB, are like two opposites—they cannot come in the same subject at the same time. Hence, in angels, who are above time, it is impossible that they would come in them in two times, so they come in them in two subjects, two kinds of angels. But for people, for whom there is time, they can come in them in one subject, but in two times. First, when they receive from GAR de AB, they burn like the angels of the grass and the hay. Subsequently, when they receive from VAK de AB, the return to their former state and exist. This is, “They are new every morning,” for because they first burn, they are regarded as renewed each morning.
For “Great is Your faith,” and not small. The Nukva de ZA is called “faith.” Since the Nukva needs to be great from the start to receive the GAR de AB, and not small, for she cannot receive the VAK before she receives the GAR, the souls must first burn when the Mochin de GAR de AB illuminate in her. In the illumination of the VAK de AB, they are renewed, as it is written, “They are new every morning,” for “Great is Your faith,” for the Nukva must be big and not small.
96) Indeed, the faith, Nukva, is great, for she can receive all the souls of the world and include them within her, the upper souls and the lower souls, including the GAR of the souls, which burn inside her, and the VAK of the souls, which come out from her to the world. The Nukva is a great and big place, which includes everything and is not filled, as it is written, “All the rivers go to the sea, and the sea is not full.” The Nukva is called “sea,” and the rivers are the souls.
All the souls go to the Nukva, and she is not filled. It is so because the souls go to the sea, and the sea accepts them and burns them in it. This is why it is not filled with them, for they burn and are gone. Afterwards the sea takes out the souls as before and they go and come to the world. This is why it is written, “Great is Your faith.”
97) On the third day, it is written twice, “That it was good,” because that day is regarded as being on both sides, the right line and the left line. He said to this side, “That it was good,” and to that side, “That it was good,” and decided between them. This is why there are two times “Said” in it, since the third day of the work of creation is Tifferet, which decides on the two lines that deny one another, which are HG, that are in dispute. This is why it is written twice here “Said,” and twice “That it was good,” since Tifferet said to the right line, Hesed, “That it was good,” and also said to the left line, Gevura, “That it was good,” sustaining the illumination of them both.
Here the four letter name Yod-Hey Vav-Hey is decorated and carved, rising to 12 letters in four forms on four sides, and inscribed on the holy throne, the Nukva de ZA. The verse, “Herb yielding seed” refers to the elicitation of the angels in the verse, “The vehicle of God are myriads, thousands upon thousands,” which are themselves only three Panim, Shina, lacking the face of a man. For this reason they themselves have no Zivug, but must rise for a Zivug from Chazeh and above, where there is the face of a man, meaning all four Panim. It was said, “Michael inscribed an inscription to the south side, and all three Panim, which are the face of a lion, the face of an ox, and the face of an eagle, look to the face of a man.
It is considered that each of the animals from the vehicle of God that rose for the upper Zivug received all four Panim there—the face of a lion, the face of an ox, the face of an eagle, and the face of a man, which is the four letter name, Yod-Hey Vav-Hey. The ox includes the four Panim, the eagle includes the four Panim, and the lion includes the four Panim. The 12 letter name is carved in the three animals Shina in four forms, where each received four forms—lion, ox, eagle, and man—when they ascended for the upper Zivug on the two sides that are there. The face of a lion is on the right, on the south; the face of an ox is on the left, in the north; the face of an eagle is in the middle, in the east, and the face of a man is on the west, and they were inscribed on the holy throne.
Let there Be Lights
98) “And God said, ‘Let there be lights.’” “Lights” is written with a Vav lacking. By that, it indicates that the disease of diabetes for infants was created, since “Lights” with a missing Vav is a curse, from the words, “The curse of the Lord is in the house of the wicked” . Once the illumination of the primordial light was concealed, a Klipa was created for the Moach .
Thus far, the first three days, which are HGT de ZA, have been explained. Now it explains the fourth day, Netzah de ZA, with which the Nukva de ZA was corrected on the first three days. Whenever it was said, “be,” it is a phrasing of diminution. “Let there be light” indicates that Yod entered the Ohr  and became Avir , and the GAR departed. “Let there be a firmament” indicates that a firmament was made under the two letters Aleph-Lamed of Elokim, and the letters Hey-Yod-Mem of Elokim descended to the degree of ZON, and became Yod-Mem-Hey.
But no Klipot came out of all those diminutions, but the three Sefirot—Bina, Tifferet, and Malchut—fell to the degree below them. Here, however, it concerns the Nukva de ZA, Malchut at the Sium of the world of Atzilut, below whom there is no Sefira of Kedusha. Klipot were made of the Sefirot that fell from her because they went out of the degree of Atzilut de Kedusha and came to BYA, which is the place of the Klipot, since for any light that falls from Atzilut to BYA, it is considered as death and as falling into the Klipot. Therefore, any diminution that was on the fourth day of the work of creation in Nukva de ZA, a Klipa was created from it.
This is why “lights” is written deficient of Vav, since “be” indicates diminution and departure, but in the Nukva, a Klipa was created from the diminution. This is why it is written “lights” with a deficiency, spelled as “curse,” since the Klipa called “diabetes” was created from that diminution, killing children who did not taste the taste of sin due to the sins of the progenitors.
Now it explains the order of the cascading of the Klipot that came out of the diminutions in the Nukva. Once the first light was concealed, which Adam saw from the end of the world to its end, and Malchut was diminished because of it, a Klipa was created for the Moach, meaning a Klipa emerged opposite Malchut. The Klipa comes before the Moach, meaning that the Klipa is a preparation for the elicitation of the Mochin, like the shell of a fruit, which is a preparation for the elicitation of the fruit. That Klipa is called “the first Lilit,” who is the root of the Klipot. Yet, she has a grip only opposite Malchut, and not at all in the first nine.
That Klipa expanded and emitted another Klipa, when it is written, “Let there be lights,” since the word “be” indicates the return of Bina to VAK as MI, since the Masach with the Malchut rose under the two letters Aleph-Lamed of Elokim, and the three letters Hey-Yod-Mem fell down and became lower waters, called Yamah . At that time the power of Tzimtzum in Malchut increased and rose also over the upper waters, Hey-Yod-Mem, which are Bina, Tifferet, and Malchut, since they became lower waters, like Malchut. That Klipa expanded and educed another Klipa, since it expanded and gripped the upper waters, Hey-Yod-Mem, as well, when they mingled with the lower waters and became Yod-Mem-Hey.
When the Klipa came out, it ascended and descended. That is, when she came out, she rose and gripped the upper waters, and when the Masach later descended below the letters Aleph-Lamed to its place, returning the letters Hey-Yod-Mem to its degree, the Klipa descended from them and reached the Panim de Katnut, ZON, when they have Mochin de Katnut. She wished to cling to them and become depicted in them, and she did not wish to part from them under any circumstances because when ZON have only Mochin de Katnut, the Klipa can grip them.
When He created Adam HaRishon, the Creator separated her from there and she descended below, meaning descended to being only opposite Malchut, like the first Klipa, the first Lilit, to correct her in this world, only opposite Malchut and not at all above her.
99) When the Klipa saw Eve clinging to the side of Adam, who is the beauty of above, she saw a complete form in them, the wholeness of the Mochin de Katnut. She fled from her place, for she had already descended to opposite Malchut, and wished to cling to the Mochin de Katnut of Adam and Eve as before. That is, as she initially wished to cling to the Mochin de Katnut de ZON, now she wished to cling to the Mochin de Katnut of Adam and Eve.
The gate keepers of above would not let the Klipa cling to them. The Creator rebuked her and cast her to the depth of the sea. Commentary: The Creator imparted Adam HaRishon with Mochin de Gadlut. These Mochin rebuke the Klipa and expel her to the depth of the sea, which is the place of the first Lilit. By that, all the power of that Klipa, which gripped the upper water, is cancelled and only the first Klipa remains.
100) The Klipa sat there, at the depth of the sea, until Adam and his wife sinned. Then the Creator brought her out of the depth of the sea, and she controls all those infants, who are small faces of people who deserve to be punished for their fathers’ sins.
After the sin of Adam HaRishon, when the serpent cast filth in Eve and the Mochin of Eve were considered upper waters, the upper waters were blemished once again, meaning the Sefirot above Malchut. It follows that the Klipa rose from the depth of the sea once more, from the lower waters, and gripped to the upper waters as she was before Adam and Eve obtained the Mochin de Gadlut, when they still gripped their Mochin de Katnut. Therefore, once again she rules over all those infants who are the small faces of people, as she ruled over all those infants before, who are small Panim of Adam and Eve.
They are punished for their fathers’ sins because fathers and sons of Neshamot  of people are an example for AVI and ZON de Atzilut. And as Katnut and Gadlut de ZON come from AVI, when Ima diminishes into MI and lowers the letters ELEH to ZON, the ZON are in Katnut, and all their Mochin are only the letters ELEH of Ima, which are clothed in them, and they have no Mochin of their own. During Gadlut, Ima returns her letters ELEH to her and imparts them Mochin de Gadlut, and then ZON have Mochin of their own.
So it is in the fathers and in the sons of the Neshamot . Prior to 13 years, the sons do not have their own authority. They are regarded as not having tasted the taste of sin because all their flaws are cast on the fathers, similar to ZON de Katnut. If the Klipot grip them at that time, they grip only the letters ELEH, which are clothed in them, and which are all their Mochin at that time. Those letters ELEH are actually of AVI, so it is AVI who suffer from the grip of the Klipot, and not ZON.
For this reason, if the Klipot grip also the Mochin of the sons in the Neshamot and put them to death, it is the flaw of the fathers and not of the sons, since the sons still have no authority of their own. But when the Mochin de Gadlut come to the sons at 13 years, then AVI are rid of them because then the sons obtain Mochin of their own, like ZON, whose Mochin de Gadlut are considered in them as their own Mochin. Then, if the Klipot grip them, AVI no longer suffer.
The Klipa goes and roams the world. She approached the gates of the Garden of Eden of the earth, and saw the cherubim, the guardians of the gates of the Garden of Eden, and sat there by the blazing sword, since she comes out from the side of that blazing. For this reason the Klipa went to the gates of the Garden of Eden and sat by the blazing sword that turns because her power extends from that blazing sword. This is why she sat there, to receive its strength.
101) When that blazing sword turns into Din, the Klipa flees and roams the world, finding infants that deserve to be punished. It is called “The blazing of the turning sword” because it turns from Rachamim to Din and from Din to Rachamim. She laughs at them and kills them, and does that at the time of diminution of the moon, who diminishes her light, as it is written, “Lights” without a Vav, which spells “curse.”
When Cain was born, the Klipa could not cling to him. Rather, afterwards she approached him and bonded with him, begetting spirits from him, as well as flying spirits. Commentary: When Cain was born, the evil was not apparent in him at all, as Eve said about him, “I have bought a man, the Lord.” This is why no Klipa could cling to him. But since the filth of the serpent was already in Eve due to the sin of the tree of knowledge, that filth of the serpent was already mingled in Cain, as well, until he rose against Abel his brother and killed him. And since then he was expelled from the face of the earth to nomad land, and then the Klipa clung to him.
102) Adam HaRishon was using female spirits for 130 years until the arrival of Naama. Because of her beauty, the sons of the gods, Aza and Azael, fornicated after her and she gave birth from them to new additional Klipot. Evil spirits and demons spread from her in the world, and they walk and roam at night, going about the world, laughing at people, and causing them to emit sperm in vain. And wherever they find people sleeping alone at home, they remain on them, grip them, cling to them, receive lust from them, and give birth from them.
Explanation: Prior to the arrival of Naama, there were only two Klipot. The first was the first Lilit, created by the concealment of the first light. She is considered only lower water, and only opposite Malchut. She is regarded as being from this world, since this world is considered Malchut. The second is the Klipa that emerged and was created when the three letters Hey-Yod-Mem fell into the lower waters, becoming Yod-Mem-Hey, and she gripped those upper waters, Yod-Mem-Hey. Once the Mochin de Gadlut came out in ZON, she parted from the upper waters and descended to this world, to the lower waters, like the first Lilit. By the sin of Adam HaRishon, she gripped the upper waters once again. It follows that that second Klipa has a grip on the lower waters, since the time she fell into this world, as well as on the upper waters, due to the sin of Adam HaRishon.
Adam HaRishon was using two female spirits for 130 years in those two Klipot, since until the arrival of Naama, there was still nothing more in the world than those two Klipot. And from her, evil spirits and demons spread in the world. A new Klipa was born out of her, by the flaw in Aza and Azael. She grips only the upper waters because Aza and Azael are considered upper waters that fell into this world. Those spirits and demons that were born to Naama are hanging in the air, in the upper waters, and have nothing of the earth.
Thus, now there are three kinds of Klipot: 1) entirely from the earth; 2) in whom there is from the earth and from the air; 3) entirely from the air.
Also, those Klipot harm with illnesses, and a person does not know from where the illness came to him. All of that is during the diminution of the moon.
Death extended from the first Klipa, who is entirely from the earth, as it is written, “For you are dust, and to dust you shall return.”
The death of infants who did not taste the taste of sin comes from the second Klipa, who is half from the upper ones and half from the lower ones, for because she is also included with the earth, she can put them to death.
But the third Klipa, who is entirely from the air, upper waters, has no interest in killing people and putting them to death, only in defiling them with the Tuma’a of emitting sperm in vain. However, since Naama is from the daughters of the earth, and her part is mixed in those spirits and demons, too, they have the strength to bring upon a person bad illnesses, but not to put them to death.
It follows that the first Klipa is interested only in putting people to death, the second Klipa—mixed with the upper ones, as well—has the strength to defile with emitting sperm in vain, and to kill infants, while the third Klipa only has the strength to defile with emitting sperm in vain, but not to kill. Instead, she can also inflict illnesses on people. However, it is the conduct of the Klipot to bond with one another.
103) It is written, “Lights” , which is a curse. When the moon was established, the letters Mem-Aleph-Reish-Tav  changed to the letters Aleph-Mem-Reish-Tav , as it is written, “ saying of the Lord is pure, a shield to those who take refuge in Him.” It is a shield against all those evil spirits and punishing litigants who fly in the world during the diminution of the moon, to all those who hold on to it with the faith of the Creator.
The Klipa precedes the Moach; she is the reason for the disclosure of the Mochin. This is so because prior to the correction of Nukva de ZA, who is called “moon,” the Klipa herself, called “curse,” becomes a shield over people after the correction of the Nukva. The letters Mem-Aleph-Reish-Tav change into the letters Aleph-Mem-Reish-Tav, and she becomes a shield.
104) When King Solomon descended to the depth of the walnut, as it is written, “I went down to the walnut garden,” he took a walnut shell, looked at all those Klipot in it, and knew that all the pleasures of those spirits in the walnut’s shells are essentially to cling to people and defile them, as it is written, “The delights of the sons of men, women very many.” The meaning of the verse is that the pleasures of the demons are only for the sons of men, meaning that it annuls the verse, “Women very many,” and interprets it as “The pleasures of a female demon and female demons are the sons of men.”
105) A female demon and female demons also emerge and are born from the pleasures of people, who delight during the night’s sleep. The Creator had to create everything in the world, all those Klipot, and correct the world with them. It is all like the walnut, Moach inside and many shells  surrounding the Moach. All the worlds are in this manner, like the walnut, Moach inside and many Klipot surrounding it above and below, in the upper worlds and in the lower worlds.
106) From the beginning of the upper point, AA, to the end of all the degrees, they are all one inside the other, and one inside the other, until you find that one is a Klipa for the other, and one is a Klipa for the other. A Klipa means externality and clothing, like the Klipa that clothes the fruit.
It is so because by the ascent of Malchut and her mitigation in the place of Bina, all the degrees divided in two—KH remained in the degree, and Bina and TM fell to the degree below it, and clothed there. That clothing remains during the Gadlut, as well. For this reason, the lower one ascends to the upper one because it clothes the Bina and TM of the upper one. Thus, Bina and TM of each degree clothe the degree below it, and each lower one becomes a Klipa, externality, on Bina and TM of the upper one.
They are all one inside the other and one inside the other until you find that one is a Klipa for the other and one for the other. That ascent of Malchut, who breaches the degrees, begins with AA, who is called “the upper point.” This is why it was said, “From the beginning of the upper point,” and not above the upper point, since Atik is also considered undivided, and all the more so the five Partzufim AK, in which there is no division at all.
107) The first point, AA, is inner light. It is impossible to know and to understand its immaculacy, fineness, and purity. This is why AA is called Hochma Stimaa , since he is hidden and concealed from all the degrees below him, even from the Partzufim of Atzilut, until the expansion from AA, who is a point, expanded.
The expansion of that point becomes one palace, called Partzuf upper AVI, who clothes AA from his Peh to his Chazeh, surrounding him like a palace. He became a palace for the clothing of that point, which is an unattained light because of her great purity, since the palace, who is Partzuf upper AVI, surrounds and clothes AA from Peh to Chazeh, where there are Bina and TM de AA that emerged from Rosh AA to his Guf, clothing Partzuf AVI. Thus, AA clothes his lower one, who is AVI, and AVI become external to him.
108) The palace, AVI, is clothing to the hidden point, who is AA, an immeasurable light. The light of the palace, AVI, is also unknown and unattainable, yet it is not as fine and as pure as the light of the first point, AA, who is hidden and concealed.
That palace expanded an expansion of the first light. From the palace, AVI, YESHSUT expanded and was emanated, and in it the first light appeared, which is explained in the verse, “And God said, ‘Let there be light,’ and there was light,” since the Yod exited his Avir, leaving Ohr . The expansion of YESHSUT is a clothing for the fine and pure palace of upper AVI, who is more internal than YESHSUT. Bina and TM de AVI descended and clothed inside YESHSUT, thus AVI also clothe inside his lower one, and the lower one becomes externality to him.
109) From YESHSUT onward they expand in one another and clothe in one another. This refers to ZA and his Nukva, that Bina and TM de YESHSUT descended and clothed in ZON, and ZON became externality to YESHSUT, until all the degrees clothe one another, where one is a Moach and one is a Klipa, one is internal, called Moach, and one is external, considered its Klipa. And although this is a clothing for its upper one, it still becomes a Moach for the other degree, the one below it, since AVI, regarded as clothing for AA, became Moach And internality of YESHSUT. Likewise, YESHSUT, regarded as clothing for AVI, became Moach for ZA, and ZA, who is clothing for YESHSUT, became Moach for his Nukva.
And just so was done below in the lower worlds BYA because the Nukva de Atzilut clothed in Beria, Beria in Yetzira, and Yetzira in Assiya. Likewise, man’s Neshama clothes in Ruach, and Ruach in Nefesh and Guf, until in this image there is also a man in this world, Moach and Klipa, which is the spirit and the body. All that is for the correction of the world.
The matter of the degrees clothing in one another, where externality of the upper one becomes internality of the lower one is all for the correction of the world. Without it, it would be impossible for ZON, and much less people, to obtain upper Mochin.
110) When the moon was together in Dvekut with the sun, the moon was in her light. First, there were ZA and his Nukva—called sun and moon—on an equal level, attached to one another, as it is written, “The two great lights.” It is so because then the Nukva, moon, had all of her light, and she did not need to receive anything from ZA, the sun. however, the Nukva could not remain in that state. She diminished from her light and descended to the world of Beria, becoming a head to the foxes there, which are the Sefirot de Beria.
Once the moon retired from the sun, descending into the world of Beria, and was appointed as the head of the hosts of Beria, she diminished herself and diminished the light in her, and Klipot over Klipot were created, many Klipot one atop the other, to conceal the Moach. Out of each diminution that was made in the lights of the Nukva, a Klipa was created, and those Klipot are as the Klipa that precedes the Moach to conceal the Moach. Those Klipot conceal the light of the Mochin.
Everything was done for the correction of the light of Mochin, for without the Klipa, the fruit would not have been revealed. This is why it is written, “Let there be lights” with a deficiency , which is a curse because of those Klipot that emerged due to the diminution of the moon, the Nukva. All that was done for the correction of the world, and this is why it is written, “To give light upon the earth,” for those Klipot came out in a Klipa that precedes the fruit.
The Two Great Lights
111) “And God made the two great lights.” “Made” means Gadlut and correction of everything as it should be. He explained above that “Let there be” indicates Katnut because future tense indicates preparation and qualification, for Katnut is preparation for Gadlut. But “And there was” or “Made” indicates the end of the matter and Gadlut. Similarly, here he explains that the verse, “Let there be lights” indicates the diminution and emergence of the Klipot, and the word, “Made,” indicates completion and correction of the Gadlut.
The verse, “The two  lights” indicates that initially, the two lights, ZA and his Nukva, were in one connection, on an equal level, and did not need each other. This is the meaning of the complete name HaVaYaH Elokim as one. And although it is not revealed but concealed, because the names HaVaYaH Elokim indicate ZA and his Nukva on an equal level PBP  in Mochin de Gadlut, here the text speaks of the time when ZA and Nukva are on an equal level in Achoraim. That is, they have Mochin de Hochma but they do not illuminate in the Nukva due to absence of clothing of Hassadim.
Thus, on the one hand, HaVaYaH Elokim are considered a complete name, as they are in Mochin de Hochma, for all the wholeness is from the light of Hochma. But on the other hand they are regarded as being in concealment of Mochin because the Hochma cannot illuminate without clothing of Hassadim. The two lights of ZON are in a complete name HaVaYaH Elokim. But the name Elokim does not illuminate in disclosure, but only in concealment, since the Hochma does not illuminate in the name Elokim, the Nukva, for lack of clothing of Hassadim.
112) It is written, “The great,” since the ZON grew there on an equal level, so the name that unites everything—Matzpatz, Matzpatz—will be called by them. That is, they will receive from those names, Matzpatz, where ZA will receive from the right Matzpatz, the Nukva from the left Matzpatz, and then they are called “The two great lights.”
The name HaVaYaH, replacing the alphabet of Aleph-Tav Bet-Shin Gimel-Reish Hey-Tzadi Vav-Peh Zayin-Ayin Het-Samech Tet-Nun Yod-Mem Chaf-Lamed is Matzpatz. This is so because the replacement of Yod is Mem, Hey for Tzadi, Vav for Peh, the bottom Hey is replaced with Tzadi, thus there is Matzpatz. They are regarded as being in the two side-locks—right and left—of Rosh AA, since the thirteen qualities of Rachamim in the Torah, which are “Gracious and Merciful God,” etc., are discerned by thirteen corrections of the Se’arot Dikna de AA. Prior to the thirteen qualities of Rachamim, two names HaVaYaH, HaVaYaH are written in the Torah, and replacing them with Aleph-Tav Bet-Shin is Matzpatz, Matzpatz. He says that they are high names, preceding the thirteen qualities of Rachamim, like the hairs of the side-locks, which are superior to the hairs of the thirteen corrections of Dikna.
The names, Matzpatz, are considered big because they grew and rose up because they are superior, coming from the upper one, since the word, “Great,” means that now He has made them big, while previously they were small. The root of Gadlut is from the two names, Matzpatz, Se’arot Dikna, which were separated and came out of Se’arot  of the Rosh because of Malchut of the ten Sefirot of Se’arot, who rose to the place of Bina of ten Sefirot of Se’arot. For this reason, Bina and TM de Se’arot departed into Guf de AA, considered Katnut of the ten Sefirot of Se’arot.
Then, during Gadlut, when AA lowered Malchut from Bina de Se’arot back to her place at the Sium , Se’arot Dikna rose back to the Rosh and were established in Matzpatz, Matzpatz. By that, it is considered that now they grew through their return to Rosh AA, and this is why those names are called “Great,” since now they grew, while previously they were small.
They are called “Great” because they grew and rose up. Previously, when Se’arot Dikna were in the Guf, they were small, since even the Se’arot that remained in Rosh AA had two lights Ruach-Nefesh in Kelim KH in them. But now that the Se’arot Dikna rose and bonded with the Se’arot Rosh, they acquired a complete degree of ten Sefirot KHB TM and both became big. Thus, the names Matzpatz indicate that they are small, but grew and rose up to Rosh AA because they are superior, coming from the upper one.
For this reason, Se’arot Dikna could rise and connect to Se’arot Rosh because they are actually from the upper one, from Rosh de AA, but they were previously diminished due to the ascent of Malchut to the place of Bina, hence they went outside the Rosh. For this reason, it is possible that now, after the return of Malchut to her place, they can rise once more to their previous degree, in which they had already been.
They are to the benefit of the world because the worlds exist in them, since the ascent of Se’arot Dikna to Rosh de AA is to benefit the ZON, which are called “world,” for by the ascent of Se’arot Dikna, the worlds, which are ZON, exist. Were it not for that correction of descent and ascent, done by the ascent of Malchut to the place of Bina, ZON would not be fit for reception of the Mochin, which is their whole existence.
And like the two names Matzpatz, there were also the two lights in the verse, which are ZON. Both as one rose in one Gadlut when ZA returns his Bina and TM that were fallen in the place of the Nukva, and elevates them back to his degree, becoming big, in ten complete Sefirot. Then the Nukva, who clothed the fallen Bina and TM de ZA, rises with them to the degree of ZA, as well. Then they receive from Matzpatz, Matzpatz—ZA receiving from the right Matzpatz, as he is considered Se’arot Rosh, and Nukva receives from the left Matzpatz, as she is as Se’arot Dikna.
Then ZA and Nukva become one degree, one is right and the other is left, as was explained in the two names Matzpatz. This is why the text says, “And God made the two great lights,” making them big, on an equal level. But that Gadlut is regarded as only Mochin de VAK, since the Hochma is without clothing of Hassadim. This is why they are called Matzpatz, which is replacing the waning HaVaYaH. So are all 13 qualities of Rachamim.
But afterwards, through a new ascent of MAN, the clothing of Hassadim was extended, as well, and then the names Matzpatz return to the names HaVaYaH, and likewise all of them, becoming Rachamim. At that time the ZON receive from them the Mochin de GAR de PBP, although they are no longer on an equal level, since now the Nukva must receive from ZA. Yet, now the ZON are called HaVaYaH Elokim, the complete name.
Explaining the Names Matzpatz, Matzpatz
First, we need to know the meaning of Partzuf Se’arot de AA. Although GAR de AB cannot remain in AA and in all the Partzufim of Atzilut, they must still emerge in it at the beginning of the Zivug. It is impossible for VAK de AB to appear without the GAR de AB appearing first. However, they promptly depart from the Partzuf because they do not have Kelim in the Partzufim of Atzilut in which they can clothe. This is so because those GAR extend only over Malchut de Tzimtzum Aleph, and that Malchut is not revealed at all below Atik Dechura . And since there is no light without a Kli, they must promptly depart from the Partzuf.
It is known that departure occurs only in the Ohr Yashar of the level, but the Ohr Hozer in it, which clothes the ten Sefirot de Ohr Yashar, cannot depart upwards due to the Aviut and Din that exist in the Ohr Hozer. Hence, here, too, only Ohr Yashar of the level of GAR de AB departed, but the Ohr Hozer in it remained in Rosh de AA even after the departure of GAR de AB.
Yet, since the Ohr Hozer is completely dark because its Ohr Yashar departed, it is regarded as waste in the Kelim de Rosh de AA, hence it promptly repels it outside the Rosh, leaving a small grip in it, in the skin of the head , regarded as Se’arot de Rosh. This is the substance of the Se’arot de AA from its origin.
And since the Se’arot clung to the skin of the Rosh of AA, they promptly received the correction from them of the division of the degree in it, as well, where Malchut de Partzuf Se’arot rose to the place of Bina in it, and Bina and TM in it left Rosh de AA completely and came to be discerned as Guf because they expanded through the Chazeh in the Guf. They are called Se’arot Dikna de AA in a way that two Sefirot KH de Partzuf Se’arot remained in Rosh de AA, and they are called Se’arot Rosh de AA, and the three Sefirot Bina and TM that came out of Rosh de AA became the 13 corrections of Dikna de AA, which are the 13 qualities of Rachamim.
Know that all the Mochin of illumination of Hochma of the Partzufim of Atzilut depend on the Se’arot Dikna, for when they are fallen in Guf de AA, there are only VAK without a Rosh in all the Partzufim of Atzilut. At the time of Gadlut, AA lowers the Malchut from his Se’arot Rosh back to her place at the Sium of Se’arot Dikna, and then the Se’arot Dikna return to Rosh de AA on the same degree with Se’arot Rosh, and are established there in right and left. The Sium of Se’arot Rosh is discerned in the right side-lock of AA, and it is the right Matzpatz. The Sium of Se’arot Dikna is discerned in the left side-lock of AA, and it is the left Matzpatz.
Through the ascent of Se’arot Dikna, Mochin de VAK appear—meaning illumination of Hochma without Hassadim—in all the Partzufim of Atzilut, which are still not Mochin of Midat ha Rachamim, since the Hochma does not illuminate without the clothing of Hassadim. This is why they are called Matzpatz, Matzpatz, which are the replacement of the name HaVaYaH in the combination Aleph-Tav Bet-Shin, indicating that the Mochin are growing smaller, like the number Tav-Shin-Reish-Kof . But the number of Aleph-Bet  that is straight, rises up.
Afterwards, through new MAN, the lights of Hassadim are extended, and the two names Matzpatz become the two names HaVaYaH, which are Rachamim, being the two names HaVaYaH that precede the 13 qualities of Rachamim in the Torah. At that time the Mochin de Gadlut are bestowed upon all the Partzufim of Atzilut from Se’arot Dikna de AA in the 13 qualities of Rachamim, which include all the Mochin de Gadlut applied in the 6,000 years through the end of correction.
The Two Great Lights
113) The moon was not at peace with the sun for she was ashamed of her. The moon said to the sun, “How do you feed? How do you lie down at noon?” That is, a tiny candle, how will it light at noon? “For why should I be as a veil over the herds of your friends?” How will I be in shame? Then she diminished herself to being a head to the lower ones, as it is written, “Go your way forth by the footsteps of the flock, and feed your kids by the shepherds’ tents.” The Creator told her, “Go and diminish yourself.”
A wife or a pasture mean light of Hassadim, received from the Peh downward, and lacking the light of the Rosh. Laying down means VAK de Kelim, missing NHY. Noon is an appellation for the light of Hochma, like the light of the sun at noon, which stands over the Rosh  of every person and does not make a shadow. So is the light of Hochma, illuminating to all directions and removing all the shadows.
In the verse, “The two great lights,” meaning when the Nukva was with ZA on an equal level, she was in Achoraim, for although she was as big as ZA, having light of Hochma, the Hochma did not illuminate in her due to lack of light of Hassadim. Therefore, the moon was not at peace with the sun, for the Nukva could not tolerate that state. She argued that ZA should draw for her the light of Hassadim, as it is written, “How do you feed? How do you lie down at noon?” It means, “How will she draw light of Hassadim—called feeding and laying down—at noon when the light of Hochma illuminates, since she wished for Hochma and Hassadim together?
It is written, “Why should I be as a veil?” That is, “How can I be in shame?” She was ashamed to be in that state so she diminished herself into being a head for the lower ones. Then the Creator told her, “Go and diminish yourself.” She diminished herself and went outside the world Atzilut, becoming a Rosh  for the lower worlds, BYA, while her internality rose for MAN and for a renewed Ibur with AVI, and she was built in a new structure so she would be fit for reception of Mochin de Gadlut from ZA, her husband.
Then her request was completed, on the one hand, for she obtained Hochma and Hassadim together, as she wanted it, but on the other hand, she had been greatly diminished, for because of that new structure she no longer had any lights of her own, but must receive everything from ZA, her husband.
114) Henceforth, she has no light of her own, except that which she receives from the sun. At first, they were attached as one on an equal level. Afterwards, she diminished herself from all her degrees, meaning lost all her degrees and went outside the world of Atzilut. Although she is the head of all the lower worlds, BYA, she is still regarded as having lost all her degrees because nothing is important to a woman except being together with her husband.
That is, since the Nukva parted from ZA, her husband, and went outside the world of Atzilut into Beria, it is the loss of all her degrees because her becoming the head in the world of Beria is of no importance to her, since she is separated there from ZA, her husband, who is in the world of Atzilut.
It is written, “The great light for the governance of the day, and the small light for the governance of the night.” “The great light” is ZA, called HaVaYaH. “The small light” is the Nukva, who is now called Elokim because she became the Sium of all the degrees, the end of the thought, the end of the world of Atzilut, who is called a “thought.” That is, while ZA and his Nukva were initially on an equal level, “The two great lights,” now after the diminution, ZA was made in the name HaVaYaH, and the Nukva was diminished and became the Sium of Atzilut, called “a point under Yesod de ZA” at the Sium of Atzilut, and now she is called Elokim, indicating Din.
In the beginning, the Nukva was inscribed above, in ZA, in the letters of the holy name, HaVaYaH, in the fourth letter of the name, for the Nukva was the bottom Hey of HaVaYaH when she was on the same degree with ZA. Afterwards she diminished herself into being called by the name Elokim.
115) And yet, the Nukva illuminates from all the sides. She illuminates from above, prior to the diminution, while she was the letter, bottom Hey, in the combination of the letters of the holy name HaVaYaH. Afterwards, when she was diminished, the degrees expanded from this side and from that side. That is, she illuminates in relation to her being before the bottom Hey de HaVaYaH, and illuminates in relation to her now being the name Elokim. The degrees that expanded in relation to her being above, the bottom Hey de HaVaYaH, are called “The governance of the day.” The degrees that expanded in relation to her being below, the name Elokim, are called “The governance of the night.”
116) The words, “And the stars,” indicate the rest of the hosts and the camps of angels, which are innumerable. All of them, those that are numbered and those that are not numbered, hang in that firmament of the heaven, Yesod de ZA, called “the one who lives forever,” as it is written, “And God set them in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth.”
117) The kingship of the house of David was established on the fourth day, the fourth leg, and the fourth foundation of the throne. At that time the letters were set, and properly settled in their places. NHYM, which are sorted and rise to complement the ten Sefirot of Malchut at the time of her Gadlut, are the four animals that carry the throne, since they complement the ten Sefirot of the throne, Malchut, and carry her for a Zivug with ZA. This is why they are also called “the four legs of the throne.” Netzah is the face of a lion, Hod is the face of an ox, Yesod is the face of an eagle, and Malchut is the face of a man. The face of a man is whole in Malchut only from Malchut’s Chazeh and above. But from Malchut’s Chazeh and below, there is no face of a man.
Those two Behinot in Malchut, the kingship of the house of David, which is the fourth day, and the kingship of the house of Joseph, which is the seventh day, and those two Behinot in Malchut, who is the fourth to the fathers, HGT, and a seventh to the sons, to TNHY, is at the end of all the Sefirot. The house of David is the fourth day, and Joseph is seventh. It is so because her from Chazeh and above, where the face of a man is complete, it is considered the kingship of the house of David and the fourth day. Her from Chazeh and below, which is devoid of the face of a man, is regarded as the kingship of the house of Joseph, the seventh day.
On the fourth day of the work of creation, only the kingship of the house of David was established, from Chazeh of Malchut and above, where there is the face of a man in the full completeness. But the kingship of Joseph was not yet established, hence the kingship of David is regarded as the fourth leg, and the fourth foundation of the throne, since the face of a man is the fourth leg of the throne, which is the inclusive of all of them, and without whom there is no Zivug de Gadlut in ZON.
Thus, the letters were established, the first correction of Malchut in the two great lights, when she was told, “Go and diminish yourself.” After the diminution, she received from ZA the Mochin de Gadlut, and her letters returned to being straight Aleph-Bet, meaning she received the Mochin from HaVaYaH directly. All that was set up only for the kingship of the house of David.
And yet, prior to the sixth day, when the form of the face of a man was corrected a complete correction, as it should be, Malchut did not settle in her place. And then, on the sixth day, the upper throne and lower throne were set up, all the worlds settled in their places, and all the letters were established on their wheels in the simplification of the complicated depiction that was in the letters.
Commentary: Although the wholeness is primarily in the kingship of David—as he is complete, in the face of a man, the fourth leg, the correction on the fourth day—it is still not sufficiently completed before it is included with the kingship of the house of Joseph, the seventh day. The kingship of the house of David is considered the fourth in the work of creation, and Joseph is the seventh day. But when the kingship of the house of David is included in Joseph, and Joseph gives him additional delight from the king’s house, the kingship of the house of David is also called “the seventh day.”
It is so because the correction and perfection of the Malchut  is primarily in the wholeness of the lower ones in the worlds BYA, and the lower ones are rooted in her from Chazeh and below. This is why they cannot receive from the Chazeh of Malchut and above, for they have no root there, but only from Malchut’s Chazeh and below, whose root is there. For this reason, before the kingship of the house of David, from Chazeh and above, is included in the house of Joseph, from Chazeh and above, she cannot complement the lower ones. That inclusion is done on the sixth day, and then the kingship of the house of David is sufficiently completed.
On the sixth day, the kingship of David, from Chazeh and above, was mingled with the kingship of Joseph, from Chazeh and below. Then the form of the lower man, his NRN de Atzilut, emerged from Malchut properly. At that time, the two thrones of Malchut were established—the upper throne from her Chazeh and above, and the lower throne from her Chazeh and below. It is so because they were included in one another, and all the worlds settled in their places. The three lower worlds BYA rose and clothed the three Partzufim Atzilut, whose real place is there, and all the letters were established with their incarnations and combinations in the simplification of the depiction of the complication of the connection that was in the letters.
And as long as the Dinim were connected and entangled in the letters, the letters were disordered and inverted, and the name HaVaYaH illuminated only as Matzpatz. But once the Dinim were removed from them, the letters were established with their incarnations, meaning the letters of the name HaVaYaH illuminated in their proper order, straightforward, as well as all the letters in her. This is considered that the complication was removed from them.
118) The fourth day, the Malchut of David, is a day that was loathed by the builders, as it is written, “The stone which the builders loathed.” It is also written, “My mother's sons were incensed against me.” “Stone” is Malchut’s name in her Katnut. The builders are the righteous who correct Malchut and build her Partzuf so she is worthy of mating with ZA. Initially, David’s Malchut was loathsome to the builders because that light, Malchut, diminished herself and her light, and the Klipot were established in their places. And because she allowed for the emergence of the Klipot and their rule, she was initially loathed by the righteous who build her.
However, once she was corrected in a structure PBP with ZA, it was said about her, “Became the cornerstone.” All those lights that illuminate during the 6,000 years hang in the firmament of that heaven to correct David’s throne with them, David’s Malchut, since the firmament of the heaven is the new Sium from Tzimtzum Bet, by which all the Mochin de Gadlut that emerged in the 6,000 years are drawn. Through that Sium, the letters ELEH fell from YESHSUT into ZON, and in Gadlut, the ZON were drawn with them to Bina’s place, and they received their Mochin from the place of Bina. Were it not for that, it would have been impossible for ZON to have Mochin de Gadlut.
Thus, all the Mochin that emerged on the Masach de Tzimtzum Bet, called “the firmament of the heaven,” were only to correct Malchut because the Sefirot above Malchut could receive all the lights from Tzimtzum Aleph, too, and did not need the firmament of the heaven. Also, all those lights that illuminate during the 6,000 years hang in that firmament of the heaven to correct David’s throne along with them because the Sefirot above her do not need the firmament of the heaven whatsoever.
119) The lights of David’s Malchut depict the depiction to the degrees from Malchut’s Chazeh and below, where there is no face of a man. That is, the degrees from Chazeh and below rise and become included in David’s Malchut, which is the face of a man from Chazeh and above. A depiction means a level of some degree. Depicting is like mating because in a Zivug, the degrees come out in the proper depiction according to the quality of that Zivug, to correct the depiction of all those who are included in the face of a man, in an inner depiction.
Any inner depiction is called “the face of a man.” “Inner” means that it comes out from the Zivug from Chazeh and above, where there is David’s Malchut, the face of a man. Yet, through the ascents of the degrees from Chazeh and below to David’s Malchut, there are the three Panim, Shina , included in the inner depiction, the face of a man, in the upper Zivug from Chazeh and above. That Hitkalelut  is implied in the stretched letter Nun  of Shinan.
The stretched letter Nun is a Hitkalelut of the three Panim in the face of a man, and not an actual face of a man. That correction was done by their Hitkalelut in the inner depiction, in the face of a man, the inner Zivug with David’s Malchut. Thus, any depiction included in this expansion of the stretched Nun is called “man” even though there is no actual face of a man in them.
It is written, “You are man.” Although the souls of people are extended from Malchut’s Chazeh and below, where there is no face of a man, because they rise from the Chazeh and below, they still rise and become included in the face of a man from Chazeh and above, in a stretched letter Nun. Souls are also called “man,” as we learn, “You are called ‘man,’ and idol worshippers are not called ‘man.’” Yet, this is only by Hitkalelut.
120) Any Ruach is called “man,” meaning only the light of Ruach that is clothed in a body is called “man.” The Guf of the Ruach on the side of Kedusha is only a clothing. That is, the Ruach is the essence of the man, and the Guf is subordinate to it, merely its clothing. But in the Sitra Achra, it is the other way around. This is why in Kedusha, it is written, “Clothe me with skin and flesh.” This means that man’s flesh is only a clothing for the essence of man, which is the Ruach . In all the places, it is written “man’s flesh,” indicating that there is the essence of man inside of him, but the flesh is merely a clothing for the essence of the man; it is a Guf for the man’s essence, while the essence of the man is the spirit  in him.
121) The Behinot from Malchut’s Chazeh and below were melted by a melting from that spirit. Depictions were depicted from the face of a man, meaning that levels of Ruchot  emerged and were born, and clothed in a different clothing, not the clothing of a man. The depictions of pure beasts, an ox, a lamb, a young goat, a deer, a gazelle, an eland, a wild goat, an ibex, an antelope, and a mountain sheep. These Behinot were meant to be included in the clothing of a man’s face, but were not included in him, but rather became other clothing, for the Shina.
Explanation: Man is called “a small world” because all the details of the world are included in him. It follows that the relation of all the particular specimens of a species in relation to man’s soul are as the relation of individuals toward their whole. Men’s souls extend from the three Panim from Chazeh and below. However, they obtained Hitkalelut with the face of a man in that stretched Nun once the three Panim Shina rose to Nukva’s from Chazeh and above and were included in the face of a man that is there.
However, even before the three Panim Shina rose to be included in the face of a man from Chazeh and above, they still elicited offspring to BYA. Thus, from the illuminations that were extended from the face of an ox, all the beasts came out. From the illuminations that extended from the face of an eagle, all the fowls came out. And from the illuminations that extended from the face of a lion, all the animals came out. Yet, during the ascent of the three Panim Shina for the upper Zivug, to the face of a man, all the beasts, and fowls, and animals that had already emerged from them rose and were included in the upper Zivug. All of them were included in the face of a man above the Chazeh, and out of the whole of them the soul of Adam HaRishon was born.
Thus, the soul of the man  contains all the particular animals that were distinguished from the three Panim Shina, for it is their inclusive. This is why the face of a man includes all the forms. And because there is no absence in the spiritual, and any change that emerges in spirituality is only an addition to the first, once the soul of Adam emerged out of all the details in the three Panim Shina—for all the forms were already included in Adam’s face—the power of the left illuminated once more, and once again distinguished the particular animals as they emerged each to its kind from the three Panim Shina prior to the Zivug.
They expanded each to his place so that after the ascent of the three Panim Shina for a Zivug above the Chazeh, a single whole was born from them—the soul of the man. Afterwards, all the particular details were born again, as they were prior to the Zivug, and these are all the species of animals. However, because they were once included in the man’s holy soul, they are considered pure species, although they were distinguished once again.
The Behinot from Malchut’s Chazeh and below, which melted by a melting from that spirit, are all the particular animals that emerged from the three Panim Shina from Chazeh and below prior to their ascent for a Zivug. Once the three Panim Shina rose for the upper Zivug and became included in Adam’s face, begetting the spirit of the man out of their inclusion, the force of the left—fire—returned and melted the spirit of the man. Once again it distinguished from him all the particular animals by their kinds, as they emerged from the three Panim Shina before they were included in the upper Zivug.
This is like a metal that consists of several elements, and a connecting force makes them all one whole in the form of a metal. When the metal is placed over a fire, it loses the connecting force in it and melts into liquids, and each element in it parts for itself and no longer connects with the other.
Likewise, the force of the left affects the man’s spirit, which includes all the animals. It melts it until each element included in it parts for itself as it was prior to its Hitkalelut  in the man’s spirit, since they lost the force that connects them—the Hitkalelut with the face of a man that is there, which tied all of them into one whole. It was said that they “Melted by a melting from that spirit,” where by the force of the left, the spirit of man melted and parted into all the details of Shina that were included in it.
However, both of them remained. The whole remained, as it is written, “The spirit of men that rises is above.” And likewise the details, as it is written, “The spirit of the beast that descends is below toward the earth.” It is so because there is no absence in the spiritual. They had to be included in a clothing of Adam’s spirit, and then they were in his Behina. But by the force of the left, they lost the Hitkalelut of the man, which is the connecting force within them, and hence melted off him and parted into their elements, “an ox, a lamb, a young goat, a deer, a gazelle, an eland, a wild goat, an ibex, an antelope, and a mountain sheep,” as they were prior to the ascent for the upper Zivug for the birth of Adam’s soul.
The inner spirit of the Behinot—ox, lamb, etc.—is called by the same name by which the body of that spirit is called, since the body is a clothing of that name, not the actual owner of the name. The body is the ox’s flesh, and the ox is the inner spirit of that body. His flesh is a clothing to it. Similarly, the bodies of all the animals are named after the inner spirit clothed in each of them.
122) As has been explained about the spirit of the man of Kedusha and pure animals, so it is on the other side, which is not holy. The spirit that expands through the rest of the idol worshipping nations comes out of the side that is not holy and is not considered Adam. This is why he is not called “man,” since the face of a man is absent from Malchut’s Chazeh and below, from which the spirits of the sons of men are born. Rather, for the birth of a holy soul, the three Panim Shina rise from the Chazeh and below and become included in the upper Zivug from Chazeh and above, in the face of a man that is there.
However, after the sin of Adam HaRishon with the tree of knowledge, the filth of the serpent was drawn into the world, and the system of Tuma’a, called “a wicked man,” was extended from there. He does not wish to rise to the face of a man above the Chazeh of Malchut because Bliyaal  has the letters of Bal Yaal . Instead, he wishes to extend the Zivug in Malchut’s Chazeh and below. This is the filth of the serpent. This is also the sin of the primordial serpent, who connected from Malchut’s Chazeh and below, and separated the face of the man above the Chazeh. Spirits of idol worshippers extend from that wicked man, impure spirits of sons of men that extend from the filth of the serpent.
That spirit is impure and is not called “man” because it extends from a wicked man, who does not wish to rise to the face of the man above, and for this reason has no part in him. His body is a clothing of the impure spirit, impure flesh. The spirit is impure in its internality, and the flesh is its clothing. For this reason, as long as that spirit is in that body, he is called “impure.” If the spirit comes out of that clothing, out of the body, the body is no longer called “impure,” and the clothing is not considered impure, since the impure one, the spirit, had already left and came out of it.
123) Depictions were depicted from the lower Behinot—beasts, animals, and birds—that melted by a melting from that impure spirit. These are particular spirits that clothed in another clothing, in depictions of the impure beasts, as it is written, “And this to you is impure,” which are the pig, the fowl, and the beasts of the Sitra Achra. The spirit is called “impure,” and the body is its clothing. The body is called “the flesh of a pig” because the pig is in its internality, which is the spirit, and the flesh is the clothing of that spirit called “pig.”
As has been explained about the spirit of the man of Kedusha, the elements of Shina precede the whole, which is the spirit of the man. Once the spirit of the man came out, all the animals were included in him, and were then distinguished into their elements once more as before. And since they were included in the face of a man in the holy Zivug, they obtained purity from it even after they were distinguished. These are the pure animals.
In the exact same manner, once the spirit of the man is defiled by the filth of the serpent by drawing the Zivug above to the place from Chazeh and below—when the force of the left comes over that impure spirit of the man and separates all the elements in him into their forms, in which they emerged before they were included in a Zivug—all become spirits of impure animals. It is so because they are elements that were melted off the impure spirit.
For this reason, those two sides part from one another and are opposite one another—one is included in the face of a man, and one is included in the impure one. On the side of Kedusha stands the general spirit of the man, and the pure spirits of the beasts, animals, and fowls, the elements that are distinguished from him. Likewise, on the side of the wicked man stands the spirit of the wicked man, which is impure as a whole, and the spirits of the impure spirits of the beasts, animals, and fowls, the elements that are distinguished from him. They are two orders one opposite the other. Each species goes to its species and does not mingle with the opposite side. And even if it does mingle, in the end it returns to its kind, for so it is both on the side of Kedusha and on the side of Tuma’a.
124) All the upper lights that illuminate, illuminate in the firmament of the heaven so that below, proper depictions would be made. Depictions are levels of the Sefirot BYA, and for NRN of people and angels, as it is written, “And God placed them in the firmament of the heaven ... and to rule over the day and over the night,” to depict depictions properly, since a governance of the two lights is a governance as it should be.
125) The great light, ZA, is the governance of the day. The small light, his Nukva, is the governance of the night. The rule of the male is during the day, to fill the house with all that is needed, and to bring into it prey and food. When the night comes and the Nukva takes everything, there is no rule in the house but the Nukva, for then the governance is hers, as it is written, “She rises while it is still night and gives prey to her household.” She and not he. At that time the Nukva gives and not ZA because the governance of the day is the male’s ZA, and the governance of the night is of the Nukva, and not of ZA.
126) The great light is the sun, containing 12 openings and 12 hours, and the sun governs the day. The small light has 12 openings, and it is the moon, the Nukva de ZA. She governs the night. There are 12 hours in the night. This is why it is written, “On that day the Lord  will be one and His name, One.” It writes “One” twice, since One is the name HaVaYaH, ZA, the great light, and “His name One” is the Nukva, the small light.
The sun and the 12 openings in him became the 13 qualities of Rachamim. The night, the moon, and the 12 openings in her also became 13, and the sun became one, and the moon one. Then it is written, “On that day the Lord will be one and His name One,” since Aleph-Het-Dalet  is 13 in Gematria. And since there is 13 in HaVaYaH, who is the sun, it is written, HaVaYaH Ehad . Also, regarding the 13 of the Nukva, who is the moon, called “His name,” it is written about her, “And His name One.”
The sun and the moon became one, and the day and night became one, as it is written, “And there was evening and there was morning, one day.” That unification was done only above, above Chazeh of the Nukva, where there is that complete unification, and not from Chazeh and below.
The Zohar explains the verse, “And there was evening and there was morning, one day.” The meaning is that the evening, too, returns to being day. Also, the difference between the unification in the verse, “And there was evening” here, to the verse, “On that day the Lord will be one and His name One,” is that it writes “one” twice in it. One is the big Mochin of illumination of Hochma, that when they illuminate in the worlds the unification of the Creator appears in the world, hence one  is 13 in Gematria, the thirteen qualities of Rachamim, since the number 13 that is made in the ten Sefirot indicates that they extend illumination of Hochma from the 13 qualities of Rachamim in AA.
The governance of the day extends from the 12 openings in the sun to the 12 hours of the day. With the actual sun, which illuminates from 12 openings, they are 13. This is “The Lord is one,” since the sun, ZA, extends the great Mochin of illumination of Hochma from the 13 qualities of Rachamim, and then it is called “The Lord is one.” Similarly, 12 openings were set up in the moon, the Nukva, and with the actual moon, in whom the openings are opened to receive from the sun, it is in one number, 13, which is “And His name One.”
However, this will be at the end of correction, when the light of the moon is as the light of the sun, as it is written, “On that day the Lord will be One and His name One.” But during the 6,000 years, once the moon has been diminished, the actual moon does not appear, complementing the number “one,” since she does not illuminate from her own self, but from what she receives from the sun. This is why it is not written here, “And there was one evening and one morning,” but both are included in “One day,” since “one” appears only in the governance of both of them as one. At that time the night comes and is included in the governance of the day, which is why it is written, “And there was evening and there was morning, one day.”
127) Since the Nukva was appointed to the house and entered her husband, there is no governance in the house except to the maidens who remained in the house. The maidens that serve the Nukva are called “stars,” as it is written, “And the stars.” The Nukva gives them the rule over her house when she enters the Zivug with ZA, near the morning light, for then it is the governance of the maidens, who are the stars, which is lesser governance. This is why at that time the darkness doubles in the world, as it is written, “And a portion to her maidens.”
However, it is a preparation for the Zivug to correct all the corrections of the house, to prepare her for the Zivug with the sun, to correct the abundance of the day. And after the Zivug near the morning light, the house returns to the governance of the male during the day, and everything becomes as it should be—the Nukva being included under the ruling of the male in a Zivug, and then she gives the morning light to the world as it should be.
Illuminations of Light and Illuminations of Fire
128) “And God made the two lights.” This is a light and that is a light. The sun is a light and the moon is also a light in and of herself. This is why those lights that rise up are called “illuminations of light,” and those lights that come down are called “illuminations of fire,” since those illuminations of fire are degrees below, which rule over all the weekdays.
After he explained the Katnut and Gadlut, that the moon could not remain in a state of two great lights on an equal level—Matzpatz, Matzpatz—and therefore diminished herself and returned to Ibur, obtaining the Mochin de PBP, it was possible to think that the state of two great lights was completely cancelled after the diminution of the moon. And he tells us that the situation of the two great lights still illuminating in the world, as well, though as illuminations of fire, is because a change of the spiritual does not mean that the first state is absent and the next state takes its place. Rather, each change that is said regarding the spiritual means only an addition to the previous state, but the previous state is also not absent. For this reason, even after the moon was diminished, her previous state was not lost, for she was with ZA on an equal level—Matzpatz, Matzpatz.
The two great lights mean that the sun was a light and the moon was a light, not like after the diminution, when the moon herself was not an illumination at all, but receives light from the sun. Rather, at that time the moon herself was an object that illuminates by itself, like the sun. For this reason, those lights that rise up are called “illuminations of light.” And since the moon was once an illuminating object, that state was not absent from her even after the diminution. However, in that regard there is still a big difference between them because the light of the sun is illuminations of light, and the light of the moon is illuminations of fire.
This is so because the whole power of the ascent of the Nukva to ZA for an equal level is because during Katnut, his three Sefirot Bina and TM were fallen in the degree of the Nukva and became a single degree with her. Hence, when ZA raised his fallen Bina and TM once more from the place of the Nukva, returning them to his degree, the Nukva rose along with them because she was regarded as being on the same degree with them. For this reason, the Nukva became as the actual degree of ZA, his Bina and TM.
However, at that time they were regarded as right and left of the same degree, so the Kelim KH de ZA that never fell from him remained now as right, illuminations of light, and Bina and TM—who fell to the Nukva and now returned to him—became left, illuminations of fire. For this reason, the lights that ascend are called “illuminations of light,” where the lights that illuminate above—in KH through the Chazeh, in whom there was no fall from the degree of ZA—became the right, light of the sun, and are called “illuminations of light.” Conversely, the lights that descended, his Bina and TM—who descended to the Nukva, and now ZA elevated them back to him along with the Nukva—are called “illuminations of fire,” as they are on the left in him, where there is the force of the fire. These are the degrees below the Chazeh, regarded as Kelim de Achoraim, and they rule on week days.
This does not mean that ZA remained only in KH, and the Nukva only in his Bina and TM. Rather, they are included in one another and there are KHB TM to ZA and KHB TM to the Nukva. However, all five Sefirot de ZA are regarded primarily as his KH, which dominate him, and all five Sefirot de Nukva are regarded primarily as Bina and TM de ZA, since they govern her.
For this reason, when the Sabbath day ends, we bless on the candle, since then the illuminations of the fire are given permission to rule, for on the Sabbath day ZON are in Zivug de Gadlut PBP, and the Nukva is subordinate to ZA and has nothing of herself nor of her hand, except that which ZA, her husband, gives her. It follows that at that time the Nukva has no permission to disclose the light in her—the illuminations of fire—since at that time she must be in diminution to disclose the lights of Gadlut de PBP, which can illuminate in her only when she is in diminution. But at the end of the Sabbath, once the great Zivug de ZON PBP had stopped, the Nukva has permission to disclose her illuminations of fire.
129) A man’s fingers are the concealments in the degrees and in the upper secrets. There are Panim and Achoraim in them. The hands are HG de ZA, and at the time of Gadlut they become HB, since during Gadlut, when he raises NHYM and completes his ten Sefirot, HGT rise to HBD, and NHY to HGT. At that time the three joints of the right hand are considered HBD of Hochma, and the three joints of the left hand as HBD of Bina.
According to the verse, “Lift up your hands to the holiness,” when he raises the hands to the head, when HGT become HBD, the wrist along with the fingers are considered the first joint, Hochma. It is so because when raising up the hands, the fingers are at the top part, and the rest of the joints of the hand are below them. The second joint of the hand, the arm, is regarded as Bina, and the third joint, the arm, is connected to the shoulder and is regarded as Daat.
Thus, the fingers are Hochma de HB de ZA because the fingers of the right are Hochma de Hochma, and the fingers of the left are Hochma de Bina. By that he describes what we learn, that the Creator is destined to make a dance for the righteous, and He is sitting in the midst of them in the Garden of Eden, and each and every one points with his finger, “This is our God,” since the fingers are Mochin de Hochma, and Mochin de Hochma are vision and the light of the eyes. This is why we say, “Points with His finger.”
“A man’s fingers are the concealments in the degrees and in the upper secrets.” A man should be a Merkava  to ZA, as we learn that the fathers, they are the Merkava. Also, they committed a man to saying “When will my works reach the works of my fathers.” At that time a man’s fingers are present, regarded as Hochma de Hochma on the right, and Hochma de Bina on the left, the most hidden Mochin of all the degrees and upper secrets.
There is no degree without Panim and Achoraim, since there are ten Sefirot KHB TM in each degree, and the KH in it are considered Kelim de Panim, and Bina and TM in it are considered Kelim de Achoraim. It follows that in the degree of the fingers, which are Hochma, the KH in it, are Kelim de Panim of the fingers, and Bina and TM are the Kelim de Achoraim of the fingers.
The Achoraim of the fingers are on their exterior. This implies to the fingernails, for between the Kelim de Panim and Kelim de Achoraim there is a Parsa, a firmament that divides between the upper waters, KH, and the lower waters, Bina and TM. This is applied in general—the Parsa between Atzilut and BYA, as well as in each particular degree, since there is no degree in which there aren’t ten Sefirot KHB TM. There is also a Parsa between KH, and Bina and TM in her.
The fingernails are a particular Parsa to the degree of Hochma in the fingers, separating the Kelim de Panim, KH in him, from the Kelim de Achoraim, Bina and TM in him, so that the interior of the fingers are KH de Hochma and the fingernails are the Parsa below them. Also, Bina and TM de Hochma are included in the nails because the Parsa includes anything that is below it.
This is why a man has permission to look at the nails at the end of the Sabbath, since then they illuminate from the same candle and the same fire, to rule on weekdays. The state of the Nukva and her Gadlut from prior to her diminution is not cancelled even after she has been diminished to obtain the Mochin de PBP. However, she has no permission to use them because she must be annulled before ZA because they illuminate for her only when she is annulled before him. But after the Mochin de PBP depart from the Nukva, after the end of the Sabbath, the Nukva is permitted to illuminate her illuminations of fire again, as she was during the two great lights.
In the state of the two great lights, Nukva is considered Bina and TM de ZA—his Kelim de Achoraim. It follows that at the end of the Sabbath, the Kelim de Achoraim of the fingers—the nails—begin to illuminate, since they receive from the illuminations of fire of the Nukva—Achoraim de ZA—which begin to govern at that time. It is so because then they illuminate from the same candle because the nails illuminate from what they receive from the Nukva from the state prior to her diminution, when she is called “illuminations of fire,” meaning the candle.
130) The nails are seen but inside the fingers there is no permission to see by the light of that candle because the interior of the fingers are the Kelim de Panim, KH, which cannot receive from the Nukva de ZA, who has no Kelim de Panim, KH, at all.
The rule is that each Behina must receive from its corresponding Behina in the upper one. Hence, they must receive only from ZA, who has Kelim KH. For this reason, the inner side of the fingers do not illuminate at all through the illuminations of fire and can illuminate only illuminations of light, which is ZA, in whom there are the Kelim KH, for they illuminate only from above, from Kelim de Panim, regarded as from Chazeh and above, which are present only in ZA.
The interior of the fingers are called “inner Panim,” as they are Kelim de Panim, KH, as it is written, “And you shall see My back, but My face shall not be seen,” so that the man will not look at the interior of the fingers when he blesses, “Creator of illuminations of fire,” at the end of the Sabbath. It is so because they are considered inner Panim, of whom it was said, “But My face shall not be seen.” It is written, “And you shall see My back.” These are the exterior Panim of the fingers, the nails, which illuminate at the end of the Sabbath. “But My face shall not be seen” are the inner Panim of the fingers, who cannot receive from the illuminations of fire.
The interior of the fingers governs during the Sabbath, for then they receive from their corresponding Behina in ZA. The exterior of the fingers governs the weekdays, who then receive from their corresponding Behina in the Nukva while he is considered illuminations of fire.
131) And on the Sabbath day, the Creator is the sole ruler in these interior Panim, on His throne, all are included in Him, and the governance is His. On the Sabbath day, the Nukva is annulled before ZA like the small light, as this is why she diminished herself, so she could receive the Mochin of PBP that illuminate on the Sabbath. It follows that ZA rules alone. At that time, his Kelim de Panim, KH, illuminate.
“The Creator is the sole ruler in these interior Panim, on His throne.” It is so because the Nukva is considered a throne and she is annulled before these Kelim de Panim—all the Behinot below ZA are included in ZA—and the governance is his. For this reason, the Creator bequeaths rest to all the worlds, and the holy people, who are “One nation in the land,” inherit the inheritance of that day.
Because on the Sabbath day the governance is only the Creator’s, there is no grip at all to Dinim and slandering on that day, He bequeaths rest to all the worlds, and the children of Israel, who are one nation in the land, can inherit the Mochin of the Sabbath day that are carried from ZA, since there is no fear of the grip of the Klipot. The reason why the great Mochin of Sabbath are called “inheritance” is that all the Mochin that the children of Israel receive from their father in heaven is by an awakening below, as we learn, “You have labored and found? Believe.”
It is as people purchase possessions in this world. The greater the possession, the greater should be the exertion that they give for it. But the Sabbath lights do not require any labor, and no awakening from below helps in regard to them. Rather, the abundance comes to Israel only by the upper governance. This is why the abundance of the Sabbath is called “inheritance,” for the son inherits the treasures of his Father in heaven and is rewarded with them without any labor or awakening of his own.
But the truth is that he who did not labor on the eve of the Sabbath, what will he eat on the Sabbath? It is so because the lights of the Sabbath, too, require labor on the eve of Sabbath. However, this relates to the awakening from below that is necessary at the time of reception of the abundance. On the actual Sabbath day, when receiving those great lights, there is no awakening from below at all in them. It is rather like an inheritance.
The illuminations of light come from the right side, the first light that was on the first day of the seven days of creation, the light on which it was said on the first day, “Let there be light.” On the Sabbath day, only those illuminations of light illuminate and rule, and all the worlds below Atzilut receive and illuminate from them.
132) When the Sabbath ends, the illuminations of light are concealed so they would not be disclosed, and the illuminations of fire rule in the world, each in his place. The Sabbath day is the place of the ruling of illuminations of light, and the weekdays are the place of the ruling of illuminations of fire. The time of their ruling is from the end of the Sabbath to the eve of the  Sabbath. This is why they need to receive their illumination from that candle at the end of the Sabbath.
133) “And the animals ran to and fro.” The eye does not control them because they run to and fro. These are the revealed animals, meaning the lower animals, of whom it was said, “And you shall see My back.” Although they are revealed animals, they still run to and fro.
That wheel stands in the midst of them, and it is Matat, who includes all those lower animals. When he runs to, he is called Nuriel. When he runs fro, he is called Matat, who is bigger and more important than the rest of those animals, and 500 parasangs  higher than them.
Matat is the face of a man, drawn to lower animals because of a Hitkalelut in the upper Zivug above the Chazeh. He is the Nun in Shinan , since Matat is the small Adam. The face of Adam  is only from Chazeh and above. None of it reaches the lower animals, but only a Hitkalelut from above. This is why he is called “small Adam.” And because the face of a man  includes all the forms, Matat includes all the animals of the lower Merkava, as he is their “Face of Adam.” And since he extends from the Hitkalelut in the face of Adam above the Chazeh, it is considered that he is higher than the animals by 500 parasangs.
It is so because from Chazeh and above, Mochin de Bina illuminate, whose numbers are hundreds. The five Sefirot KHB TM in her are 500. And since Matat receives them only from the Parsa that stands at the place of Chazeh and not above the Parsa, for there is the place of Zivug and Hitkalelut, the Mochin are called parasangs, received from the Parsa. It was said, “500 parasangs higher,” meaning that the Mochin receives KHB ZON from the Parsa at the Chazeh, where the rest of the animals have no share because they are only lion, ox, and eagle below the Chazeh.
134) The hidden animals are under the high and hidden letters, the Yod-Hey of the name HaVaYaH, which govern the Vav-Hey of the name HaVaYaH. The hidden animals are from Chazeh de ZON and above, where there are GAR, implied in the two letters Yod-Hey, of which it is written, “The secret things are to the Lord our God,” in whom there is no attainment whatsoever. Hence, the animals that stand there are also hidden and concealed, and there is no attainment in them. The animals below the Chazeh, Vav-Hey de HaVaYaH, are as it is written, “The revealed are for us and for our sons,” for there is the place of the revealed Hassadim, and there is seeing and attaining there, as it is written, “And you shall see My back.”
These letters Vav-Hey are a Merkava for the letters Yod-Hey who reveal their illumination, like a rider who is seen on his carriage. Likewise, the lower animals are a Merkava  for the upper animals who reveal their illumination. The most hidden of all that is hidden, who is not known at all, Ein Sof, implied in the tip of the Yod of the name HaVaYaH, rules over all of them and rides over all of them, and all the degrees reveal His dominion in the worlds.
The lower animals that appear are below those hidden animals, receiving their illumination from them and journeying by their force. That is, the lower animals have no power or operation of their own except what they receive from the upper animals.
135) The upper, hidden animals are all included in the firmament of the heaven. It is written about them, “Let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven.” The verse teaches us that all the lights are hanging in the firmament of the heaven, and that it is the firmament over the animals, of which it is written, “And an image over the heads of the animal was a firmament like the terrible ice,” which is that first firmament.
In general, we find two firmaments, as it is written, “And from the end of the heaven to the end of the heaven.” A firmament is the Sium of Tzimtzum Bet, which took out Bina and TM of each degree to the degree below it, which is the Parsa that stands at the place of Chazeh of each Partzuf. The beginning of its disclosure is in the middle of Partzuf Bina de Atzilut, called YESHSUT, between GAR de YESHSUT—that stand from Chazeh de AA and above—and their ZAT, their Bina and TM, which stand from Chazeh de AA and below.
This is why that firmament inside Bina is called “the primordial firmament.” It is also called “the end of the heaven above,” since that firmament lowers the tip of Partzuf Bina, her Bina and TM, into the heaven, ZA. There is another firmament, which stands at Chazeh de ZA and lowers the tip of Partzuf ZA, its Bina and TM, to the Nukva who ends Atzilut. This is why that firmament is called “the end of the heaven below.”
All the upper animals from Chazeh de ZON and above are included in the primordial firmament of the heaven, standing at the place of Chazeh of Partzuf Bina, to distinguish the lower animals from Chazeh de ZON and below, who are not included in that primordial firmament. Any Achoraim of an upper one, from his Chazeh downward, are clothed in Kelim de Panim of the lower one—in its Kelim KH above the Chazeh. But the Achoraim of the upper one are never clothed inside the Kelim de Achoraim of the lower one, from his Chazeh and below, since the reason for the clothing is the ascent of Malchut to Bina, which is done during the Katnut of the Partzufim.
At that time, through that ascent, each Partzuf is completely devoid of the Kelim from his Chazeh and below, and how can the Achoraim of the upper one clothe in Achoraim of the lower one when they are absent in him? After all, the lower animals of ZON, from Chazeh and below have no connection or Hitkalelut with the primordial firmament, the Achoraim de Bina, since they had never clothed in them.
136) From there and above, from the primordial firmament, there is no one who can learn and know because he is concealed in the thought, since above the primordial firmament, above Chazeh de Partzuf Bina de Atzilut is GAR de Bina, considered a thought, and there is no perception whatsoever in the GAR. There is no one in the whole world who can attain and know the thought of a man, much less matters that depend on the upper thought—there is none who can attain them. And the thought itself is all the more unattainable.
The Sefira Bina is considered GAR and thought. Of her ten Sefirot, the GAR in her are her own essence, and the ZAT in her are not her own essence, but are ZON that are included in her. Even ZAT de Bina, which are only included in, and depend on the thought, on Bina, attainment does not perceive them in their own place, but only in the place of ZON, much less the GAR de Bina, which are the essence of Bina. No attainment perceives there, more internal than the thought, which is Bina. Who can affect any notion there, since there is no understanding there to even ask, much less to know, since above Bina is AA, Keter of all the Partzufim of Atzilut, Ein Sof, in whom attainment does not perceive at all?
Three Lights
137) There are no impressions to grip in Ein Sof, nor any question or a notion for teaching the thought. A fine, unattainable light illuminated from the beginning of the descent of Ein Sof to be revealed, from the most hidden of all that is hidden. It is concealed in an impression as fine as an eye of a needle. That is, a very narrow opening has been opened, insufficient for gripping. It concerns a hidden thought, GAR de Partzuf Bina, called “actual thought.” It is so because in Ein Sof, who is AA, there is no impression to grip, and from the beginning of the decline of Ein Sof to come to be revealed, which is in GAR de Partzuf Bina, called AVI de Atzilut, it was imprinted there in a fine impression, though still insufficient for a grip.
It was not attainable until an illumination expanded from it to a place in which there are Reshimot  of letters, meaning Partzuf ZAT de Bina, called YESHSUT de Atzilut. It is so because ZON de Atzilut are letters, and ZAT de Bina are not the actual Bina but a Hitkalelut from ZON. This is why they are regarded as Reshimot of letters, ZON. And because they are near ZON, attainment and disclosure begin with them. They all came out from there, all the Mochin de Gadlut de ZON and BYA come out of ZAT de Partzuf Bina, YESHSUT.
138) First, everything was inscribed in the letter Aleph, the beginning and the end of all the degrees. It is a Reshimo with which all the degrees are imprinted. It is only called “one,” meaning that the Aleph has the number “one,” indicating that although there are many forms in it, for it includes all the degrees, it is still only one. That is, all the degrees became one in it.
Of course the Aleph is a letter on which the upper ones and lower ones depend. It is because the shape of the Aleph  indicates Tzimtzum Bet, the ascent of Malchut to Bina. The new Sium is the middle line of the Aleph, the upper Yod is KH that remained in the degree, and the bottom Yod is Bina and TM that departed from the degree and fell to the degree below it. It also indicates the Gadlut that rose and reunited into a single degree with the upper Yod through the middle line in the Aleph, and then all the Mochin of the Partzufim ABYA appeared from her.
There is no existence of Mochin de Ohr Yashar from Tzimtzum Aleph even to the upper ZON, much less to the NRN of the righteous. This is why The Zohar refers to Tzimtzum Aleph as “hidden in an imprint as fine as an eye of a needle.” The imprint is hidden like an opening made by the tip of a needle, where the shape of the opening is undetectable, and the opening is unfit for disclosure of Mochin. That Reshimo of Tzimtzum Aleph is Malchut of upper AVI, GAR de Bina. The Reshimot of the shape of the Aleph, which is Tzimtzum Bet, begin to appear only in Partzuf ZAT de Bina, YESHSUT.
It follows that the shape of the Aleph includes all the degrees of Atzilut because the shape of the upper Yod that precedes the line in the diagonal indicates upper AVI de Atzilut. The tip of the upper Yod is AA de Atzilut, in whom Tzimtzum Aleph still illuminates and are considered upper water before the diagonal of Aleph, which is the firmament, appears, the new Sium of Tzimtzum Bet. The diagonal itself is the firmament that ends AVI and AA. It is Partzuf ZAT de Bina, YESHSUT. The bottom Yod is ZON that are attached to Bina and TM that fell from YESHSUT, both in Katnut and in Gadlut.
For this reason, the descent of Ein Sof begins to appear from the most hidden of all that is hidden, and it is hidden in an imprint as fine as a needle’s eye. In the beginning of the disclosure of the illumination of Ein Sof it illuminated in fineness like a needle’s eye, which is Tzimtzum Aleph, and ZON and BYA could not receive anything through that opening. It extended through Malchut of upper AVI at Chazeh de AA until illumination expanded from it to a place in which there are Reshimot of letters, through ZAT de Bina, called YESHSUT, which stand below Chazeh de AA, in whom there are Reshimot of letters, ZON.
The shape of the Reshimo of letters that emerged in the beginning of everything was the shape of the Aleph, meaning Tzimtzum Bet, in which there is the beginning and end of all the degrees. The Rosh is the upper Yod of the Aleph, implying AA and upper AVI, who are the head of all the degrees. The end is the bottom Yod of Aleph, which implies ZON, which are the end of all the degrees.
The letter Aleph is a Reshimo with which all the degrees were inscribed, meaning the diagonal, which is the dividing firmament, the Sium of Tzimtzum Bet itself, YESHSUT, in whose inscription of the dividing firmament all the degrees of ZON and BYA were inscribed. He is called only “one” because that firmament, YESHSUT, makes all the Partzufim of Atzilut into one, since in Gadlut, he expands through the Sium of Atzilut by which he ascends with ZON to Rosh de AA where all the Partzufim become one.
139) The Rosh of Aleph, the upper Yod in it, is the concealment of the upper thought, implying the ascent of Malchut to the place of Bina de AVI, called “upper thought,” which lowered Bina and TM de AVI below to YESHSUT, with only the two Kelim KH remaining in AVI. Thus, the upper Yod of Aleph indicates AVI when there are only KH in them, during the concealment of the upper thought.
That expansion of the upper firmament, the expansion of the time of Gadlut—when the upper firmament expands to the place of Malchut, elevating Bina and TM once again—is still entirely hidden in that Rosh of the Aleph, in her upper Yod, so that when the shape of Aleph comes out of that firmament, Mochin de Gadlut, it will come out in the shape of the Rosh of the thought.
The upper Yod of Aleph implies AA and AVI. That Yod implies Katnut, which was done in AA and AVI due to the ascent of Malchut, when only KH remained in their degree, and Bina and TM de AA descended to AVI, and Bina and TM de AVI descended to YESHSUT. The reason why AA and AVI received into them the Tzimtzum Bet and the Katnut that extends from it is so that later there would be expansion of the firmament during the Gadlut in the shape of the Aleph, the lights would emerge in the shape of the Rosh of the thought, and the lights of AA, the Rosh of AVI, which are the thought, would appear.
Those Bina and TM de AA that fell because of Tzimtzum Bet and clung to AVI cause the disclosure of his Mochin, for during Gadlut, when the firmament expands downward and he elevates his Bina and TM back to his Rosh, AVI—that are attached to them—rise along with them to Rosh AA. Also, Bina and TM of AVI raise the YESHSUT with them to Rosh AA, and Bina and TM de YESHSUT raise the ZON with them to Rosh de AA. Thus, all come out in the shape of the Rosh of the thought, who is AA, and all illuminate in illumination of Hochma through him. But if AA and AVI did not receive the diminution of Tzimtzum Bet into them, and did not lower their Bina and TM to YESHSUT, it would be impossible for Mochin de AA to be revealed to the worlds.
Six degrees HGT NHY are included in the middle line in Aleph. These are the VAK of Partzuf Bina, YESHSUT. That firmament inside the Aleph is the meaning of all the upper, hidden animals inside the thought, who is Bina.
After The Zohar explained the upper Yod of Aleph, which is upper AVI and the line in the middle of it, YESHSUT, it now explains the bottom Yod of Aleph. It says that it is the animals, ZON, that are hanging in the firmament like the bottom Yod that hangs in the diagonal of Aleph. However, it says that only the upper, hidden animals, who are HGT from Chazeh de ZON and above, are hanging in the thought, in the line, which is VAK of the thought, excluding the lower, revealed animals—NHYM, from Chazeh de ZON and below—who are not hanging in the thought, which is the firmament inside the Aleph.
It is so because the Achoraim of the upper one are clothed only in Kelim de Panim of the lower one through the Chazeh, and not at all in the Kelim de Achoraim of the lower one, from Chazeh and below. Therefore, the upper animals, Kelim de Panim de ZON, are attached and hang in Bina and TM of the firmament, VAK of the thought, but the revealed animals from Chazeh and below never became attached to them. This explains how the shape of the Aleph include all the degrees, that the upper Yod is AVI and AA, the firmament in the middle is YESHSUT, to which the bottom Yod, ZON, is attached and hanging.
140) One light, which illuminated and was concealed, is the light of the letter Bet of Beresheet . “In the heat of the day,” Abraham was sitting by the tent door, which is an opening from below upward, and the heat of the day was illuminating on that opening and illuminating there.
Once The Zohar explained the head, middle, and end of the shape of the letter Aleph, that the end of the letter Aleph, the bottom Yod that is hanging on it, is the upper hidden animals, HGT from Chazeh de ZON and above, it returns to explaining those three hidden animals. It calls them three lights: The first light is Hesed, right line, the quality of Abraham. The second light is Gevura, left line, the quality of Isaac. The third light is Tifferet, middle line, the quality of Jacob.
Those three lines of ZA extend to him from the three points—Holam, Shuruk, Hirik—in the order of the elicitation of Mochin in YESHSUT, since Mochin come out in Bina only in the order of those three points. First, upon the elicitation of Bina, YESHSUT, from Rosh de AA, by the ascent of Malchut to her place, the Bina was established at a point in her palace in Mochin de Hassadim without GAR. It is so because the point, Malchut, rose to the palace of AA, Bina, and Bina and TM of the palace descended because of her to ZON below it, leaving only the lights NR in Kelim KH in the palace. This is why that light is called a “point in her palace.”
This is the point inside the Bet of Beresheet , where the Bet is the Bina, called “palace,” and the point inside of it is the Malchut that rose to her. That point is the point of Holam above the letters.
Therefore, one light that illuminated and was concealed is the light of the letter Bet of Beresheet, the first light, the light that illuminated and was then concealed. Bina de AA was first in GAR de Rosh AA, then the point, Malchut, rose to her. By that, Bina came out of GAR de Rosh AA, the light of GAR from Bina was concealed, and she remained in VAK without GAR. Thus, in the beginning, the light of Bina illuminated in completeness, and then was concealed. This is the light implied in the letter Bet of Beresheet, a point in her palace.
That point, which rose to the palace, by which the palace diminished into VAK, is regarded as warmth and Dinim. The text implies in regard to her, “In the heat of the day.” “The heat of the day,” when Abraham was sitting by the tent door, that point is called “the heat of the day,” and is also called “the tent door.” It is written about it that Abraham was sitting by the tent door in the heat of the day.
It is an opening from below upward because the point, Malchut, who rose to the palace Bina, is an opening from below upward. Through her, the lower ones, which are ZON below, rise to Bina above when the point returns to her place, while Bina and TM that fell to the place of ZON return to Bina. At that time the ZON that are attached to them rise with them to Bina, too.
Thus, that point is an opening above, through which those below rise up. The heat of the day illuminates that opening and illuminates there. The heat of the day—the Dinim and Masach that was established in the point, to repel the upper light from her—illuminates in that opening, at the point, from below upward. From there she also illuminates downward in a Zivug de Hakaa with the upper light, which raises Ohr Hozer and extends Ohr Yashar. This is the point of Holam and is regarded as light of Hesed, right line, the quality of Abraham. From here comes the face of the lion in the upper hidden animals from Chazeh and above, as it is written, “And the face of a lion on the right.”
141) The second light is a light that gradually darkens before evening. It is the prayer of Isaac. To correct that degree, as it is written, “And Isaac went out to walk in the field at dusk,” there were looking of evening and all kinds of darkness in him regarding the afternoon prayer. At that dusk, Jacob looked at Esau’s appointee, of whom it is written, “And a man struggled with him.”
The second light, the left line of ZA above his Chazeh, extends from the point of Shuruk in Bina, for when the point descended from the palace, the place of Bina, she returned to her place, Malchut’s place, and the three Kelim Bina and TM that fell from the palace of Bina to ZON returned to her. Then Bina was completed with ten Sefirot and returned to her place to Rosh de AA. Then light of Hochma de AA reached Bina once more, as before she was diminished, and ZAT de Bina are discerned, having been darkened by the ascent to Rosh de AA because the ZAT cannot receive the light of Hochma without clothing of light de Hassadim. And since the Rosh de AA is entirely light of Hochma, only GAR de Bina could receive that light, but ZAT de Bina remained in the dark, without light of Hassadim and without light of Hochma. This is the meaning of the point of Shuruk.
The second light, the left line, is a light that grows darker at dusk because by Bina’s return to Rosh de AA, ZAT de Bina gradually darken, as it is written, “At dusk.” Isaac’s prayer is to correct that degree because in his prayer, implied in the verse, “And Isaac went out to walk in the field at dusk,” he corrected and extended that degree of the point of Shuruk, receiving from there the left line of ZA, which complements only GAR, and leaving ZAT in the dark.
This is why there were “Looking of evening and all kinds of darkness in him,” since through the afternoon prayer he extended the left line from the point of Shuruk, which includes every kind of darkness in the world, and corrected them properly. For this reason, that second light is regarded as the darkness of Isaac, the light of Gevura de ZA, and from here comes the face of an ox in the high and hidden animals, on which it is written, “And the face of an ox on the left.”
142) The third light is a light that contains those two lights, the right line and the left line, a light that illuminates for healing. That light is the middle line, which extends from the point of Hirik in Bina, meaning the new level of Hassadim that Bina received through her clothing in Masach de ZON that rose to her. That light adds to the Hassadim on the right line and becomes a clothing of Hassadim for the light of Hochma. At that time the two lines are included in one another where the right line is included with the light of Hochma and has Hochma and Hassadim, and the left line is included with Hassadim and has Hochma and Hassadim. This is why it says about it, “A light that contains those two lights,” for that light includes the two lines because it complements between them.
For this reason, it, itself, is rewarded with receiving both their illuminations, for to the extent that the lower one complements the upper one, the lower one is rewarded with them, as well, as it is the cause. This is a light that illuminates for healing because through its level of Hassadim, the left line is healed, receiving by the force of illumination of Hassadim on the right line.
It is written of Jacob in regard to that third light, “And the sun rose for him,” meaning that once Jacob was included at dusk, in the darkness of the left line, and needed healing, it is written, “And the sun rose for him,” to heal him from the darkness of the left. That third light is considered the middle line, which decides over the two lines, right and left. It is the light of Tifferet, and it is the quality of Jacob. From here extends the face of an eagle in the high and hidden animals from Chazeh and above.
Henceforth, once Jacob extended the light of the middle line with the Masach de Hirik, it is written about him, “And he limped upon his thigh.” His thigh means the Sefira Netzah of ZA, called “Israel,” since the two Sefirot NH are called “his two thighs.” He interprets the verse, “And the sun rose upon him as he passed over Peniel, and he limped upon his thigh,” as meaning that the rising of the sun, the third light, is the direct reason for limping on his thigh, since the Masach de Hirik extends the level of Behina Aleph, which is VAK without GAR.
Although he already obtained the GAR through the point of Shuruk and extended that level of Hassadim only for the purpose of healing, the GAR still diminished for him to an extent through that Zivug on Masach de Hirik. You already know of the inverse relation between Kelim and lights, that the absence of NHY de Kelim is absence of GAR of lights, and vice versa—the diminution of GAR of lights that comes to him due to the Masach de Hirik is regarded in the Kelim as limping on the thighs, which are NH. Thus, the rising of the sun, which is the level of Hassadim that he extended in the light that illuminates for healing is a direct reason for his limping on his thigh, for the diminution of the GAR.
143) “On his thigh” is written in singular form, and not his thighs, in plural form. This indicates that it is the fourth degree, Netzah, from which no man prophesied until the arrival of Samuel, of whom it is written, “And also the Netzah  of Israel will not lie.” Then Netzah was established, having been weak since the time he was put at risk by the angel, Esau’s appointee.
“Limping upon his thigh” extends from the diminution of GAR. Hence, it concerns both thighs and should have said, “Limping on his thighs,” which are NH, called “two thighs.” But it says one thigh, Netzah, the fourth degree. However, it includes both thighs, NH, since until that time it was still not corrected in a correction of lines but only from Chazeh de ZA and above, HGT. From Chazeh and below, NHY, it was not corrected at all, since it lacked the face of a man there.
For this reason, it is considered that there is nothing of the right in them, and NH were considered left, one degree. This is why it does not write, “And he was limping upon his thighs,” since both are still one thigh and one Sefira, the Sefira Netzah, and not Hod, for in the Kelim it is considered that the upper ones grow first. Hence, as long as the two thighs are regarded as one, they are regarded as Netzah, as it is the upper one of the Sefira Hod, for which it grows and becomes apparent before Hod.
This is why it is a fourth degree, since the fifth degree, Hod, had not appeared there. Hence, it is necessarily the Sefira Netzah. The correction from Chazeh and below is to rise and be included in the face of a man in the upper Zivug. That correction was done by Samuel. It was said that no man had prophesied from there until the arrival of Samuel, and it is written about him, “And also the Netzah of Israel will not lie,” for then Netzah was scrutinized as right, and as the fourth degree, and Hod as left and as a different degree from Netzah, the fifth degree of Kelim, Hod.
144) “And he touched the hollow of his thigh” means that when Esau’s minister came to Jacob, Jacob took strengthening from that dusk, from the point of Shuruk and left line in the correction of Isaac, by the force of the Din. Jacob was included in it in the left line, and this is why he could not defeat him. “And he saw that he could not prevail over him, and he touched the hollow of his thigh,” and Jacob took strengthening from there. That is, when the angel touched the hollow of his thigh, when struggling with Jacob to make him fall, Jacob took strengthening from that thigh to repel the angel from there by the force of that Din that there is in the left line above the Chazeh. This is why, “The hollow of Jacob's thigh was sprained,” meaning the angel prevailed over him.
Because the thigh is outside the body, since Jacob is the Sefira Tifferet, called Guf , and that Guf is included in the two degrees male and female, called Adam, since Adam consists of male and female from the Chazeh and above, the face of a man is whole, hence the angel could not prevail over him. And when Jacob took strengthening from Chazeh and below, outside his Guf, promptly, “The hollow of Jacob's thigh was sprained.”
Once the angel touched the Chazeh and below, he could not be corrected in the upper Zivug because the face of a man was missing in him, and then his whole correction was as it is written, “And all their hind parts were inward.” But after Jacob wished to extend from there strength toward the angel, the lack of the face of a man there promptly appeared, and due to the disclosing of that deficiency, the angel gripped him and “The hollow of Jacob’s thigh was sprained.”
145) No man prophesied from there until Samuel came and corrected the Netzah. This is why it is written about him, “The Netzah  of Israel will not lie,” for he is not a man. Although Netzah is outside the Guf, below the Chazeh, where there is no face of a man, for which no one has corrected it thus far, still Samuel corrected it by elevating and including it in the face of a man above the Chazeh. For this reason, “The Netzah  of Israel will not lie.” And the words, “For he is not a man” mean that although he is not as the face of a man, he still corrected it.
But Hod remained in its weakness because Samuel, too, could not correct it. It will be corrected in the future, at the end of correction. It is said below that as for Hod, the left thigh, it was said, “And he was limping upon his thigh.” That is, even after Samuel corrected the Netzah and returned it to the right, the weakness in the left thigh, Hod, remained.
Joshua prophesied from the Sefira Hod of Moses, as it is written, “And you shall put of your Hod  on him.” That is, Joshua existed before Samuel the prophet came, which is why he could not prophesy from Netzah, because of the weakness from the touch of the angel. This is why it is written abut him, “And you shall put of your Hod on him,” teaching us that he prophesied from Moses’ Hod. This is the fifth degree, Hod.
Moses is the internality of ZA and entirely from Chazeh de ZA and above. However, from Chazeh and above there is another complete Partzuf in him, HGT NHY. Those NH from Chazeh and above are separated from one another, hence there are five degrees HGT NH there, corresponding to KHB TM.
Joshua prophesied from the fifth degree, but from Chazeh de ZA and below the face of a man is missing, Malchut and Hod, and there are only four degrees there, through Netzah without Hod. And once the Netzah was weakened by the angel’s touch, no one prophesied from there.
Netzah is Jacob’s left thigh. This is why David came and included it in the right, for it does not say, “The pleasantness of your right are Netzah,” but “Pleasantness are on your right, Netzah,” indicating that before David, the Netzah was not on the right, but David returned to the right. From Jacob through Samuel and David, Netzah was regarded as left.
146) What is the reason that Jacob’s thigh weakened? It is because the side of Tuma’a  approached him and took strengthening from him, and then the absence of the face of a man was revealed, and wherever there is a lack in Kedusha, the Sitra Achra grips there. The correction was detained until Samuel, which is why Samuel came to remind that this is the thigh of Israel, as it is written, “And also the Netzah of Israel.”
There are two names to ZA—Jacob in Katnut, Israel in Gadlut. “And the hollow of Jacob's thigh was sprained” is when he is called Jacob. At that time the two Sefirot NH are as one thigh, since they are discerned as left. However, when ZA is called “Israel,” in Gadlut, NH are discerned as two degrees, right and left. For this reason, when Samuel corrected Netzah again, he mentioned the name Israel in regard to him, indicating Gadlut, at which time Netzah is to the right and Hod is to the left. Then it was said, “And also the Netzah of Israel will not lie.”
For this reason, all of Samuel’s words were in Din, in the beginning and in the end, since he was essentially about purifying the Netzah from the weakness that Esau’s minister caused him. This is why his prophecy was in Gevura and Din, for this is what is needed for corrections of purification. And right at the start of his prophecy he prophesied Dinim on the house of Eli, and in his end, he prophesied Dinim on Saul.
147) The Creator also included him in the Sefira Hod when he ordained the kings, Saul and David. Therefore Samuel is equal to Moses and Aaron. As Moses and Aaron were separated to the two sides, right and left above the Chazeh, Samuel from Chazeh de ZA and below was like them on two sides, right and left, NH. And although they were only the left side here, they were still parted into two sides by Samuel, like Moses and Aaron of above. Thus, although Samuel is from Chazeh and below, he is equal to Moses and Aaron from the Chazeh and above, since Samuel elevated the NHY from Chazeh de ZON and below to be included in the Zivug of the face of a man in HGT de ZON above the Chazeh, and then NH from Chazeh and below parted and became two sides, like the HG from Chazeh and above.
All the degrees were included in one another through Samuel, for by that he became equal to Moses and Aaron as implied in the verse, “Moses and Aaron in His priests, and Samuel in them who call upon His name,” since VAK, HGT, NHY were included in one another. Through Samuel’s correction of elevating NHY from Chazeh de ZON and below and including them in HGT from Chazeh and above, extending from the point of Holam to Netzah, from the point of Shuruk to Hod, and from the point of Hirik to Yesod, all the VAK are included in one another—Netzah connects to Hesed, Hod to Gevura, and Yesod to Tifferet, and all are in the face of a man, who is Malchut.
Moses and Jacob
148) As right and left above the Chazeh—Moses and Aaron—grip and unite in the right and left below the Chazeh, which is Samuel, the middle line of above, Tifferet—Jacob and Moses—grip and unite with the middle line below the Chazeh—Yesod, Joseph. Thus, all the VAK were included and united in one another. The four ends of Moses, Aaron, and Samuel, and the two ends of Jacob and Moses with Joseph. Jacob and Moses are both Tifferet de ZA—the interior of Tifferet is Moses, and the exterior of Tifferet is Jacob. Previously it was said that Moses and Aaron are right and left of above, and here it is said that Moses is Tifferet, since there are many Behinot of Moses.
Jacob is the landlord. When Jacob died, Moses took the house and was with her in his life. There is nothing in which there are no internality and externality, for each degree divides into Kelim de Panim—KH and the upper third of Bina through the Chazeh, where the Parsa is—and Kelim de Achoraim and externality—Bina and TM from the Parsa and below. However, the Kelim de Panim and Kelim de Achoraim are included in one another. Internality and externality can be discerned even in the Kelim de Panim of some degree by itself. The internality is the essence of their degree, the Kelim de Panim, KH or HGT, while their externality is only a Hitkalelut from the Kelim de Achoraim, Bina and TM or TNHYM.
Similarly, there are internality and externality in the Kelim de Achoraim by themselves, where by their Hitkalelut with the Kelim de Panim of above, it is considered their internality, KH through the Chazeh, while their own essence—Bina and TM below the Chazeh—is their externality. It is likewise in each degree and each Sefira.
Moses and Jacob are both a Merkava for ZA de Atzilut. However, Moses is a Merkava for the internality of ZA, Kelim de Panim from Chazeh de ZA and above, and Jacob is a Merkava for the externality of ZA, Kelim de Panim included in Kelim de Achoraim de ZA that stand from Chazeh and below.
Nukva de ZA is entirely from the Achoraim of Chazeh de ZA and below, and she is called “a house.” It follows that Moses, who is a Merkava for the internality of ZA from Chazeh and above, is not in the same Behina as the Nukva de ZA, who is entirely from Chazeh de ZA and below. This is why only Jacob—the externality of ZA, Kelim de Panim included in Chazeh de ZA and below—has equivalence with the Nukva de ZA—Kelim de Achoraim from Chazeh and below. Hence, Jacob is considered the landlord and not Moses, for he is a higher degree than the Nukva de ZA. Also, male and female must be from the same Behina, since a Zivug means equivalence of form.
This is why it was said that Jacob is the landlord, for because he is a Merkava for the externality of ZA, he has equivalence with the Nukva de ZA, who is called “a house.” Jacob is considered her husband. After Jacob died, Moses took the house, the Nukva de ZA, and was with her while he was alive in this world. And although in terms of his spirit he is a Merkava to the internality of ZA and has no equivalence with the Nukva, as long as his spirit was clothed in a body in this world, and any body is entirely from Kelim de Achoraim, he had equivalence with the Nukva de ZA in terms of his body, and caused the Zivug of ZA with the Nukva during his life in this world after Jacob died.
Joseph was righteous through Jacob and through Moses, since Jacob and Moses were both Merkava to Kelim de Panim de ZA, KH or HGT, though one is above the Chazeh and one is below the Chazeh. It is known that there is a Zivug only through the middle line of NHY, Yesod Tzadik . For this reason, Jacob and Moses alone could not cause the Zivug of ZA with the Nukva, unless they connected in Joseph, who is a Merkava for Yesod de ZA, and then they could cause the Zivug ZON in a way that Joseph served as Yesod Tzadik for both Moses and Jacob.
149) Jacob took the house, Nukva de ZA, through Joseph, as it is written, “These are the generations of Jacob Joseph,” indicating that they were connected to one another. Also, Moses did not cause a Zivug for the Nukva until he took and bonded with Joseph because when Divinity departed from the exile in Egypt, Moses—the internality of ZA—could not mate with Divinity except through Joseph, as it is written, “And Moses took the bones of Joseph with him.” It is written that he took with him because a body is unfit for a Zivug unless the body first mates with the covenant, Yesod.
In other words, Moses is a Merkava for the Guf de ZA from Chazeh and above, and has no equivalence, called Zivug, with the Nukva. Rather, he must first mate with Joseph, a Merkava for Yesod de ZA, a covenant. This is why Moses took Joseph with him. Because Joseph was connected with him, ZA was using his Nukva as it should be. This is why it is considered that Jacob, Moses, and Joseph come as one, for both Jacob and Moses must bond with Joseph.
150) Jacob died and his body was raised to the holy land. Joseph died and his body was not buried in the holy land, only his bones. Moses was neither, as both his body and bones were buried outside the land.
Jacob was the Nukva’s first husband because Jacob is a Merkava for the externality of ZA, for the Kelim de Panim from Chazeh and below. He has equivalence with the Nukva, who is entirely from Chazeh de ZA and below. This is why he is the first, and true husband of the Nukva. But after Jacob died, the Nukva mated with the internality of ZA, Moses. And while Moses was clothed in a body in this world, for which he had equivalence with her, he was with her properly. He was the Nukva’s second husband.
151) This is why Jacob was raised to the holy land in his entire body, since he is a Guf, meaning because he is a Merkava for the Guf of ZA, Tifferet, included in his from Chazeh and below, as he is Kelim de Panim, which are included in Kelim de Achoraim. But Joseph, only his bones were raised to the holy land, not his body, since the bones are the hosts and camps of above.
There is nothing in which there are no internality and externality. Even Joseph, Yesod de ZA—who is entirely from Chazeh de ZA and below—also has internality and externality, since his Hitkalelut from Kelim de Panim from Chazeh and above is the internality in him, and his own essence is the externality in him. The ten Sefirot KHB TM in the Guf are called Moach, Atzamot, Gidin, Bassar, and Or . It follows that Moach and Atzamot, KH, are the internality of Joseph’s Guf, his inclusion in Chazeh de ZA and above. Gidin, Bassar, and Or are the externality of Joseph’s Guf, from his own essence, from Chazeh de ZA and below.
Prior to the end of correction the Klipot have a grip in the Kelim from Chazeh de ZA and below. And yet, they have no grip in those Kelim de Panim that are included in Kelim de Achoraim. For this reason, Jacob, who is entirely a Merkava for the Guf of ZA, for Kelim de Panim included in Achoraim, in HGT that are from Chazeh de ZA and below, in respect to the Achoraim themselves he has only Hitkalelut. For this reason the Klipot have no grip in his entire body, even in the Achoraim included in him, and he was buried in the holy land with his entire body.
But Joseph, as he is a Merkava for Chazeh de ZA and below, only for Yesod, he is kept from the grip only in his internal Kelim, Moach and Atzamot, but in his external Kelim—Gidin, Bassar, and Or—the Klipot have a grip. This is why only his bones were buried in the holy land, as they are kept from any grip of the Tuma’a of the Klipot, but his Gidin, Bassar, and Or were not buried there because the Tuma’a has a grip in them.
This is why Joseph’s bones were buried in the land, but not his body, since the bones are hosts and camps of above. For Moach and Atzamot are from the Hitkalelut with the Kelim from Chazeh de ZA and above, in which the Tuma’a has no grip, for which they were buried in the holy land. But the externality of the body—Gidin, Bassar, and Or—in which the Tuma’a has a grip, could not be buried.
They all stem from the same Tzadik . The Behinot from Chazeh de ZA and above are included and stem from Joseph, Yesod Tzadik de ZA, and the righteous Joseph is called “hosts” because the hosts and camps above Chazeh de ZA stem from him. Thus, the Behinot above the Chazeh are included in Joseph, and they are called his Moach Atzamot. This is why Joseph’s bones, which are the hosts from Chazeh and above, were raised to the holy land, which are Moach and Atzamot, for there is no grip to the Tuma’a in them, but Gidin, Bassar, and Or, in which the Tuma’a has a grip, could not be buried there.
152) Moses was outside the land and neither his body nor his bones entered there. But Divinity entered the land after Moses’ death and returned to her first husband, Jacob. Since Moses is from the internality of ZA, he had equivalence with the Nukva only during his life, but not after his demise. Thus, if a female was married to two men in this world, after her death she returns to her first husband. This is why Moses was buried outside the land, since her first husband, Jacob, was in the land and the Nukva belongs only to her first husband.
153) Moses was rewarded in his life with what Jacob was not rewarded in his life because Jacob caused the Zivug of ZA in the Nukva in the upper world only after his demise, but Moses caused the Zivug of ZA with the Nukva while he was alive in this world, but not after his demise. Is that Moses’ drawback that he could not cause the Zivug of ZON after his demise? It is not. Rather, when Israel went out of Egypt, their redemption was from the side of Yovel, which is Bina.
All those 600,000 of the generation of the desert were from the upper world, Bina, and in that way, Bina, they walked in the desert. Not even one from that generation came to the land. Rather, their sons, who were born to them, came to the land, as they are in the correction of the moon, Nukva, and all those who work the land in plowing and sowing are the correction of the moon.
The souls of Israel extend from ZON. Since the Nukva de ZA is mitigated in Bina, regarded as the upper world, the souls of Israel have a root in Bina, too. To bring the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt—for by nature, on the part of ZON, they were not worthy of being redeemed—the Creator extended to that entire generation high souls from the upper world, only from Bina. And through that high root the Creator redeemed them, as it is written, “And He redeemed him from the hand of him who is stronger than he.” From the direct root of the souls of Israel, Egypt’s Tuma’a was stronger than Israel’s Kedusha. But high souls from Bina illuminated for them and redeemed them.
For this reason, when Israel went out of Egypt, it was on the part of the illumination of Bina, who is called Yovel. All 600,000 souls of Israel from that generation extended from the upper world, Bina, and this is why they had the strength to overcome Egypt’s Tuma’a and be redeemed from them. And in that same way, by the illumination of Bina, they walked in the desert. But not even one of them entered the land because the land of Israel is Nukva de ZA, and since they did not have the illumination of the bottom Nukva, they could not enter the land.
But the children of the generation of the desert, who were born to them and extended properly, to be from the correction of the moon, who is Nukva de ZA, entered the land and ate of its crop. All the workers of the land is the correction of the moon because the generation of the desert, who extended from the upper world, were not workers of the land and ate bread from the heaven. Their sons, who extended from the Nukva, engaged in working the land because working the land is the correction of Nukva de ZA, to which the generation of the desert did not belong.
154) Moses extended the Zivug of ZA in the moon, the Nukva, while he was in a body in this world, and was with her as he wished, for he was considered the queen’s husband. But when he passed away from this world his holy spirit rose in the upper ascension and the spirit returned to the upper Yovel, Bina. There, in the world of Bina, Moses clung to the 600,000 souls of the generation of the desert who were his, from his Behina.
This was not so with Jacob, since he did not ascend to Bina, the Yovel, after his demise like Moses. Rather, his spirit went back down to Nukva de ZA for Shmita , which was not so while he was alive. While he was alive, he was not attached to Nukva de ZA, as after his demise, since during his life he had another home, another Nukva. That is, he had a wife in this world during his life, which is why he could not entirely cling to Nukva de ZA, as after his demise.
155) The holy land, in its lower correction, was established through the Nukva of above. That is, the Nukva of above, Ima, is on the holy land, the bottom Nukva, due to the corrections of the lower righteous. This is why they cannot all be together, for Moses and the generation of the desert cannot be together with Jacob and those who come to the land, since those who extend from the upper world, Bina, are all primarily Ruach, while those who extend from the lower world, Nukva de ZA, are all primarily Guf.
This is so because the merit of the Nukva compared to Bina is as a body compared to spirit. For this reason, the souls that extend from them are also like that. It is improper that they will be one inside the other inside the moon, the Nukva. Rather, these are inside the moon, and those are outside of her, receiving illumination from one another. Those who extend from the Nukva should receive illumination from those who extend from Bina, like a body that needs the illumination of the spirit. For this reason, those who extend from the Nukva—Jacob and those who came to the land—are inside the Nukva, the holy land, and those who extend from Bina—Moses and the generation of the dessert—are outside the holy land and illuminate to the souls in the holy land.
156) All those who entered the land were only an image of the first, from the generation of the desert, but they were not at such a high degree as them because there will not be a generation nor was a generation before like those first ones—the generation of the desert, for whom the brightness of the glory of their Master appeared face-to-face.
157) Jacob was with his wives in his life, in a body. After his demise, his spirit rose and clung to the spirit of the Nukva. Moses was separated from this wife, Zipporah, in this world and clung to that holy spirit, the Nukva de ZA, while still in a body. After his demise, Moses’ spirit clung to the high and hidden spirit above, in Bina.
All the degrees clung to illuminate as one, illuminating to one another. Those who extend from Bina—who have the value of spirit—to those who extend from the Nukva—who have the value of body. Moses’ spirit is from the Yovel, Bina, and his body is from below, from the Shmita, Nukva. Jacob’s spirit is to cling to the Shmita, Nukva de ZA, and his body belonged to his wives who are in this world. For this reason, during his life, he could not cling to the Nukva de ZA, but only after his demise. Moses is to the contrary because his body was in equivalence with the Nukva de ZA, hence he clung to the Nukva de ZA during his life, and not after his demise because his spirit adheres to Bina and has no equivalence at all with the Nukva de ZA.
158) All those upper lights are in their form in the earth below, and all are hanging in the firmament of the heaven, by which they illuminate to the earth below, as it is written, “And God placed them in the firmament of the heaven to illuminate upon the earth.”
The great lights are two names included as one. Their perfection is in three, and they returned to being one, opposite each other. Two names are included as one—Matzpatz, Matzpatz—since the Nukva is hidden in the name while she is included with ZA on an equal level, not needing to receive her lights from ZA. Their perfection is in three because she does not illuminate while she is on an equal level with ZA for lack of clothing of Hassadim, since the Zivug of the level of Hassadim on Masach de Hirik, the middle line that decides between the two lines right and left and clothes them in one another has not been revealed.
Thus, their perfection is in three, three lines. And once they have been perfected in three lines, the two of them return to one, opposite each other, as it is written, “The Lord is one and His name, One.” It is so because then the sun and the 12 hours of the day are extended, the 13 qualities of Rachamim, which is one. And also, the moon and the 12 hours of the night, the 13 qualities of Rachamim, which is one. It is a decorated and engraved name, included in faith, since the name “One” is engraved and included through the corrections in the Nukva, who is called “faith.” This is only a preparation, for at the end of correction, the name “One” will be revealed only in the Nukva, too. During the 6,000 years, it is still not disclosed only in the Nukva, but included in her, which means that it is destined to be disclosed but it is not disclosed yet.
Let Us Make Man
159) In the verse, “And God said, ‘Let us make man,’” there is a secret revealed only to those who fear Him. That elder of the elders started and said, “Shimon, Shimon, who is it who said, ‘Let us make man,’ and of whom is it written, ‘And God said’? Who is that name ‘God’ here?” As Rabbi Shimon heard that he was calling him Shimon and not Rabbi Shimon, he said to his friends, “This must be the Creator, of whom it is written, ‘And the ancient of days  is sitting.’ Therefore, now is the time to disclose that secret, for there is a secret here that was not permitted to be disclosed, and now it means that permission to disclose has been given.”
It is known that the secrets that were revealed to the sages of The Zohar were by attainment of the lights of the upper degrees by instilling. There are Panim and Achoraim  in them, meaning concealment and disclosure. According to the extent of the Panim of the degree, so is the extent of its Achoraim. The instilling of the Achoraim is a calling and an invitation to instill the Panim. This is why by the measure of the concealment of the Achoraim that they attained, they knew the measure of disclosure that they were about to attain.
As Rabbi Shimon heard, he was calling him Shimon and not Rabbi Shimon. This means that the instilling of the Achoraim, which is a calling, was so strong that he lost all his degrees and became a simple person, Shimon from the market. By that, he recognized that it was a calling and an invitation for very high attainment of Panim.
This is why he promptly said to his friends, “This must be the Creator, of whom it is written, ‘And the ancient of days  is sitting,’” of whose degree there is no higher. And he said, “And now it means that permission to disclose has been given,” meaning that now it was seen that he obtained permission to disclose that high secret. This is what is implied in those two questions, “Who is it who said, ‘Let us make man,’” and which name of Elokim was said in this verse—Elokim of Bina or Elokim of Malchut?
160) Rabbi Shimon started and said, “It is as though a king had many buildings to build and had a craftsman, but that craftsman did not do anything without the king’s permission, as it is written, ‘And I was beside Him as a master craftsman.’” A king is certainly upper Hochma, Aba. The middle pillar, ZA, is a king below. Elokim is the craftsman above, upper Ima. Elokim is the craftsman below, Divinity of below. Because there are two Behinot of a king, there are two Behinot in the craftsman, which is the name Elokim. The craftsman of Hochma, who is the king above, is Ima, called Elokim, and the craftsman of Tifferet, who is the king below, is Divinity of below, the Nukva, who is also called Elokim.
We need to thoroughly understand the two questions. The first question was, “In all the utterances of the work of creation, ‘And God said’ is considered AVI, where Aba says and Ima does. Here it is written, ‘And God said, ‘Let us make man,’’ meaning that Aba, who is the sayer, also partakes in the doing, which is impossible.” This is why he asked “Who is it who said, ‘Let us make man.’” It cannot also be said here that Aba said, “Let us make,” since no making extends from Aba because Aba is considered a potential, and Ima as actual execution.
The second question was that all the names Elokim that are said in the work of creation are Ima, and it is known that the souls of people are offspring of ZA and Nukva. This is why he asked, “Who is that name Elokim here?” Elokim here is said for the creation of man. It cannot be said that he is Ima because the soul of man does not extend from Ima, but only from the Nukva.
This is why he explains and said, “It is as though a king had many buildings to build and had a craftsman.” He compares AVI to a king and a craftsman from whom the whole of the work of creation was emanated. Yet, as AVI are a king and a craftsman above, in relation to all the degrees of ZON de Atzilut, ZA and Nukva are a king and a craftsman below, in relation to NRN of people and the worlds BYA.
It is so because ZA and Nukva cannot create souls of people unless they ascend and clothe AVI, and the lower one who ascends to the upper one becomes like him. Therefore, when Nukva elicited the soul of Adam HaRishon, she was at the degree of Ima, in the name Elokim, and ZA at the degree of Aba. This settles the second question that he asked, “Who is that name Elokim here?” In fact, it is the Nukva de ZA, but since she ascended and clothed Ima, she is like Ima. Below he explains the first question.
161) A woman has no permission to do anything without her husband’s permission. All the buildings in the way of Atzilut, meaning in the world of Atzilut, Aba would say only in a saying to Ima, “Let it be so and so,” and it was promptly done by Ima, as it is written, “And God said, ‘Let there be light,’ and there was light.” “And ... said” means the owner of the building, Aba, said to Elokim, “Let there be light.” The owner of the building—Aba—said, and the craftsman—Ima—promptly did. So it was in all the buildings, the degrees that emerged in Atzilut. Aba would say, “Let there be a firmament,” “Let there be lights,” and everything was promptly done.
It is so because Aba is the thought and Ima is the act. In the whole of the world of Atzilut there is no Masach. The saying is as the thought, like a person’s thoughts with his organs, for as soon as he contemplates doing, the organs do. This is why he said, and everything was promptly done. That is, there is no Masach that detains anything to divide the saying from the doing. But from Atzilut to BYA there is a stay and delay between saying and doing, to the extent of the Aviut  of the Masach that parts and divides between them. The saying is regarded as actual saying, meaning Zivug de Hakaa, like the saying of a king to his servants, meaning two bodies, since there is a Masach that divides the world of Atzilut from the world of Beria, and the Zivug de Hakaa on the Masach is regarded as speaking and saying.
162) When he reached the degrees from the world of separation—the world of the divided—to create the soul of man in the world of Beria—and this world is already separated from Godliness and the Kelim there are no longer Godliness—the craftsman said to the owner of the building, “Let us make man in our image, after our likeness,” the opposite of the whole of the work of creation up to the creation of man, in which the owner of the building would say. Here, however, the craftsman was saying. The owner of the building said, “Of course it is good to make man, but he will sin before you because he is a fool, as it is written, ‘A wise son is his father’s joy, and a foolish son is his mother’s woe.’” That is, Aba said that Adam’s sin will not reach him, but Ima, for “A foolish son is his mother’s woe.”
Explanation: In the world of Atzilut there is no Masach. Therefore, He, His life, and Himself are one. And although we discern Zivugim  on the Masachim  in Atzilut, as well, it has indeed been clarified that there are two kinds of Malchut: 1) Malchut in the ten Sefirot de Rosh, considered Malchut who mates with the upper light in a Zivug de Hakaa, and regarded as the emanator of that Partzuf; 2) Malchut that ends the illumination, Malchut of the ten Sefirot de Guf.
During Tzimtzum Bet, where a new Sium was made in the middle of each degree through Malchut’s ascent to the place of Bina, the mating Malchut rose to NE, and the ending Malchut to Chazeh of the ten Sefirot de Guf. The Sium of Malchut in NE has no Din and Aviut in them because she is considered the mating Malchut, the emanator. Instead, only the ending Malchut, who stands at the Chazeh, is regarded as a complete Masach, since the force of the Tzimtzum that was at the point of this world rose there in the Chazeh and arrested the light of that degree. That ending Masach that rose to the Chazeh is the Parsa between Atzilut and Beria, who ends all the Partzufim in Atzilut.
Thus, all those Masachim in the world of Atzilut, prior to the Parsa, are only from the mating Malchut, who is not regarded as a Masach at all. Moreover, she is the emanator through her Zivug with the upper light for that degree that she is in. This is why there is no real Masach in the whole of the world of Atzilut but only in the Parsa below it, who is the Malchut that ends all the degrees in Atzilut. Thus, all those Zivugim de Hakaa on the Masachim in the world of Atzilut are not actual saying, which are applied in two separate bodies, for it is not a real Masach to separate them. Rather, it is regarded as a thought because saying relates also to thought, such as “And he said in his heart.”
This is why Aba is a thought, saying. And the craftsman, Ima, brings the thought into action right away. A male and a female are like Kli and light. Aba is considered the upper light, and Ima is considered the carrier of the Masach on which the upper light mates. Although Aba, who is the upper light, strikes the Masach de Ima to emanate each level in Atzilut, this Hakaa  is not Hakaa, called “saying with the mouth,” which is done in two separate bodies, but like a person with his thought, that as soon as he thinks, his organs do, since there is no Masach to separate the degrees into two separate bodies.
For this reason, when he reached the degrees from the world of separation, the world of the divided, the craftsman said to the owner of the building, “Let us make man.” It is so because the saying of Aba, who is the upper light in Atzilut, has already stopped at the Parsa that ends Atzilut, which separates the three worlds BYA into bodies that are separate from Atzilut. For this reason, no thought helps here, being the saying of Aba, but an actual Zivug de Hakaa, called “saying of Ima,” done between two bodies by beating lip to lip, which is actual speaking that is separated and heard from a body to another body.
This is why Ima said to Aba, “Let us make man,” since the light of Ima, light of Hassadim, can part and come to the world of the divided, to the soul of Adam de Beria, but not the light of Aba, who is light of Hochma, which illuminates only in the world of Atzilut and stops its illumination above the Parsa. Thus, why did she say to Aba, “Let us make man,” if his light is not imparted upon Beria? The answer is that a woman has no permission to do anything without her husband’s permission. This is why Ima said, “Let us make man,” for she was given permission from Aba to illuminate to him and elevate him from Beria to the world of Atzilut.
This is why the owner of the building said, “Of course it is good to make man, but he will sin before you because he is a fool,” since Adam de Klipa is called “a fool.” He would seduce the man to extend for him the light of Atzilut to BYA, to the Klipot, and then the man is called “A foolish son,” as he clings to a fool.
You should know that upper AVI are both called Aba, and YESHSUT are both called Ima. This is why Aba said, “He will sin before you,” since people have no root in AVI whatsoever, but only in YESHSUT, who is Ima, hence man’s sins do not reach Aba at all, only Ima.
163) Ima said, “Because his sins depend on Ima and not on Aba, I want to create him in my image,” as it is written, “And God created the man in His own image.” It does not write here, “In our image,” since she did not wish to include Aba in him.
Upper AVI were established in Man’ula , Malchut de Tzimtzum Aleph, on whom there is no Zivug. YESHSUT were established in Miftacha, Malchut that is mitigated in Bina. This is the meaning of Ima’s saying, “I want to create him in my image,” in Miftacha, and he will have none of Malchut de Midat ha Din from Tzimtzum Aleph, who is considered Aba, for then he will be completely separated from the Klipot and will not sin. This is why it is said in The Zohar that Adam HaRishon has nothing of this world because he was entirely from Ima, who is Bina. But from Malchut de Tzimtzum Aleph, who is this world, included in Aba, Adam HaRishon did not have anything, since Ima did not want to include Malchut de Tzimtzum Aleph, who is in Aba.
164) When Adam sinned, it is written, “For your sins was your mother sent away.” The king, who is Aba, said to Ima: “Did I not tell you that he would sin? Why did you create him?” At that time he exiled him and exiled his mother with him. This is why it is written, “A wise son is his father’s joy, and a foolish son is his mother’s woe.” “A wise son” is Adam in Atzilut, who is ZA. “A foolish son” is Adam de Beria, Adam HaRishon, whose soul is from Beria.
165) All the friends arose and said to Rabbi Shimon with bewilderment, “Rabbi, Rabbi, is there such a separation between Aba and Ima that the emanated on the part of Aba will be Adam de Atzilut, and on the part of Ima will be Adam de Beria? After all, both are from the degree of Bina de Atzilut?”
Rabbi Shimon said to them, “Friends, friends, it is not to be interpreted so, since Adam de Atzilut is male and female from the side of AVI—male from the side of Aba, and female from the side of Ima. It is written, ‘And God said, ‘Let there be light,’ and there was light.’ ‘Let there be light’ is from the side of Aba, and ‘And there was light’ is from the side of Ima. That Adam was emanated in two Partzufim that were both attached to one another on the same level. Thus, the male and female that were emanated from AVI were both equal, which shows that AVI are also on the same degree.”
166) But Adam de Beria has neither image nor likeness from AVI. From his root, he has no relation to AVI to receive from them the Mochin of image and likeness. But upper Ima had one appellation that amounts to 86, such as the count of Elokim, and that appellation is light and darkness.
There is the name of the essence, where the name is from the essence of the degree, and there is an appellation, which is a name that is borrowed from another degree. This is why upper Ima, Bina, had a different appellation, Malchut, who was the same number as Elokim. She rose to Bina and took from her the name Elokim. It is so because the Nukva in and of herself does not have that name. Rather, she borrowed it from Ima, and this is why the name Elokim de Nukva is an appellation from Ima.
In that appellation, in the Nukva, there is light and darkness. And because of that darkness in that appellation, Aba said that Adam de Beria would sin. Adam de Beria is the light of the upper clothing, meaning the light of Adam is from a clothing higher than him, who is the Nukva, in whom there is light and darkness, and he would sin because of the darkness in her.
It is so because although Nukva was mitigated in Ima and attained the name Elokim, like her, she still did not lose her own self completely, being Midat ha Din. Rather, her own self was concealed within her and only Midat ha Rachamim of Ima was apparent in her. Thus, there are light and darkness in her. If he is not rewarded, the darkness appears. This is why Aba said that Adam would sin, since Adam was created by the upper clothing, for those Kelim Bina and TM de Nukva that descended to the soul of Adam HaRishon during Katnut became a clothing to the Nukva during her Gadlut, the soul of Adam HaRishon rises with them, and he receives the Mochin de Gadlut through them. This is why he could fail, because of her darkness.
167) That light, which Adam received in the upper clothing, is the light that the Creator created on the first day of the work of creation, in which Adam saw from the end of the world to its end, and afterwards concealed it for the righteous. It was said about it, “Let there be light.” That darkness that is hidden inside the Nukva is the darkness that was created for the wicked on the first day. It is written about it, “And the wicked will be silenced in darkness.” Because that darkness would make that light of the soul of Adam sin, Aba did not want to partake in it when Ima told him, “Let us make man.”
This is why Ima said, “Let us make man in our image, after our own likeness.” “In our image” means in our light. “After our own likeness” means in our darkness, which is a clothing for the light, to separate it from that darkness that was created on the first day, of which it was said, “And the wicked will be silenced in darkness,” for it is not a clothing for the light but makes the man sin. The darkness of Ima is a clothing for the light, like the body, which is a clothing for the soul, as it is written, “You shall clothe me with skin and flesh,” since the darkness of Ima was made by the ascent of Malchut to her to receive Midat ha Rachamim in her, at which time Bina and TM de Ima descended to ZON, and her GAR disappeared.
Ima did that on purpose, to extend Mochin and light to ZON. Thus, the darkness is a preparation and a clothing for the light, since those Kelim, Bina and TM, which descended from Ima to ZON, later became a clothing for Ima, during Gadlut. ZON are attached to that clothing and receive the light through it. This is why it was said that the darkness of Ima is a clothing for the light.
Everyone rejoiced and said, “Happy are we that we have been rewarded with hearing such words that have not been heard thus far.”
This also settles the first question that he asked, “Who is it who said, ‘Let us make man’? for any “And ... said” presented in the work of creation relates to Aba, and how can it be that Aba would say “Let us make,” for making is only in Ima? Rabbi Shimon replied that it indeed relates to Ima because Ima said to Aba, “Let us make.”
I, I am He
168) Who is it who said, “See now that I, I am he, and there is no God with Me”? The one who says the verse is the cause of all the causes. And the one who is called “the cause of all the causes” is not above all the causes, but a cause among the rest of the causes.
The degrees hang down from one another by cause and consequence, where each lower one is caused and results from its superior. A cause means operator; a consequence means operated. This indicates that the lower one has nothing except what it receives from its upper one.
The friends who heard, understood the words of Rabbi Shimon, who calls Partzuf AK “the cause for all the causes,” above the worlds ABYA. Rabbi Shimon calls Partzuf Atik de Atzilut “the cause of all causes,” who is a consequence of AK, and a cause for all the Partzufim ABYA. Rabbi Shimon rejected them, for each of those causes will do nothing before it receives permission from the cause above it, as is explained in the verse, “Let us make man,” that Ima cannot do anything without permission from Aba. So it is in every cause and consequence—every lower one has no strength to do anything unless it receives the strength from the upper one.
169) The verse, “Let us make man” certainly relates to two, for each lower one said to the superior above it, “Let us make man.” The lower one does not do anything without receiving permission and saying of that Partzuf that is above it. Likewise, its superior does not do anything until it receives an advice from his friend above him, so that each and every Partzuf from the Partzufim of Atzilut said, “Let us make man” to his superior, and the superior to the superior of the superior, for every novelty and emanation comes from Ein Sof and cascades through the degrees until it comes to its place.
The cascading is considered here that each lower one says, “Let us make man” to his superior when he receives from him the soul of man, to pass it on to the ones below him. But for a Partzuf called “the cause for all the causes” there is no similar above or below, as it is written, “And to whom will you liken Me that I should be equal, shall be said, ‘holy’?” He said the verse, “See now that I, I am He, and there is no God with Me,” from whom to receive counsel, such as every lower one said to its superior, “Let us make man.”
170) All the friends rose and said to Rabbi Shimon, “Rabbi, give us permission to speak in this place.” They said to him, “Did you not clarify above that the cause of causes said to Keter, ‘Let us make man’?” The friends understood in the words of Rabbi Shimon that the cause for all causes is AK, who is the Keter of all the worlds and above whom there are no degrees because he is the first degree that was emanated from Ein Sof. They also thought that the cause of causes is an appellation for Atik de Atzilut. But afterwards, when he said that each degree said to the one above it, “Let us make man,” it follows that the cause of causes, Atik, also said to AK, Keter, “Let us make man.”
And that verse, “See now that I, I am He,” the friends knew that it relates to Atik. This is why they asked him “How come Atik said, ‘And there is no God with Me,’ from whom to receive counsel, since he can receive counsel from Keter, who is AK, as Rabbi Shimon said that each consequence said to its cause ‘Let us make man?’” Rabbi Shimon told them, “May your ears hear what your mouths speak. Did I not tell you that there is he who is called by the name “the cause of causes,” and he is not the one called ‘the cause for all causes,’ for the cause for all the causes has no other from whom to take counsel, since he is unique, preceding all, and no one partakes with him?”
171) This is why he said, “See now that I, I am He, and there is no God with Me,” from whom to receive counsel, because he has no other, no partner, nor a calculation. There is one in partnering, such as a male and a female, of whom it is written, “But ‘One’ I called him.” But he is one without a calculation and without a partner. This is why he said, “And there is no God with Me.”
Explanation: He taught them to understand that he was speaking of the first giver to the worlds, of whom there is no higher. In that sense, Atik is the cause of all the upper ones because AK, who is above Atik, is not considered a giver because he is established in Malchut de Tzimtzum Aleph, and that Malchut was concealed in Rosh de Atik, there is no Zivug on her, and the worlds do not receive from her prior to the end of correction. For this reason, Atik was established in fissuring and not fissuring, which is in between AK and ABYA. This is why Atik is considered the first giver to the worlds, of whom there is no higher, since the worlds cannot receive anything from AK.
But at the end of correction the Malchut of Tzimtzum Aleph that was concealed in Rosh de Atik will appear and receive a Zivug from Atik, and give to the worlds ABYA. Then it is written about her, “The stone that the builders loathed has become the cornerstone,” since Malchut is called “a stone,” and as she is concealed in Rosh Atik without a Zivug, wherever this Malchut appears, Dinim and punishments extend from her. This is why the builders loathed her. But at the end of correction. when she receives the Zivug there in Rosh Atik, she will appear and it will be seen to all that she was the cornerstone.
Then Atik will say as it is written, “See now that I, I am He and there is no God with Me.” Rabbi Shimon interpreted “There is no God with Me,” from whom to receive counsel, because He has no other, no partner, nor a calculation. For during the 6,000 years, AA is regarded as Keter of the world of Atzilut, and Atik is completely hidden due to the concealment of Malchut de Tzimtzum Aleph, on whom there is no Zivug. The Zivug is only in regard to the fissure, which is Malchut that is associated with Midat ha Rachamim, where the first Partzuf that came out on that associated Malchut is AA, who lacks Malchut de Tzimtzum Aleph, and who received the associated Malchut. This is why he is the one who gives to all the Partzufim of Atzilut. That is, he receives from Atik and gives to Atzilut, and Atik himself is not known prior to the end of correction.
At the end of correction, when the verse “ became the cornerstone” appears, it is said, “See now that I, I am He.” Malchut is called “I.” And because Malchut de Tzimtzum Aleph will receive the great Zivug, it will be revealed in the world that “I” in the 6,000 years who was associated with Midat ha Rachamim, and her Atzmut  was hidden, “I am He,” meaning “I” of Tzimtzum Aleph, the disclosure of Malchut’s Atzmut. “And there is no God with Me,” meaning I have no other from whom to take counsel for the “I” that is revealed in the 6,000 years needed a second degree, Bina, from whom to take counsel, meaning correction.
But now I do not need counsel from another because I am complete in all my needs for myself, and not associated, meaning I am no longer associated with Midat ha Rachamim because my Din is sweet by the sweetness of the wholeness. “...nor a calculation.” The Masach that is associated with Midat ha Rachamim of Bina is called “calculation” because Heshbon  comes from the word Machshava , where the Bina mitigates the Masach. She says that henceforth she does not need that calculation anymore, meaning the mitigated Masach.
This is why it was said that there is one in association, such as a male or a female, of whom it is written, “But ‘One’ I called him.” It is so because prior to the correction, Malchut was associated with Midat ha Rachamim, such as ZA and Nukva, who are called “sun and moon,” where through the association with Midat ha Rachamim they received the Mochin of the 13 qualities of Rachamim, which is one. Then it was said about ZON, “But ‘One’ I called him,” as it is written, “He is one and His name, One.” But he is one without calculation and without association. Now Malchut herself is one without calculation, which is a mitigated Masach, and without the association of Midat ha Rachamim, as it is written, “On that day the Lord will be one and His name One,” since the moon does not need to be included in ZA, as it is written, “He is one and His name One.” Rather, the moon would become an illuminating essence by herself in One. This is why He is one, the sun, and His name One, the moon, since the light of the moon will be as the light of the sun.
The friends all rose and prostrated before him and said, “Happy is the man whose Master agrees with him, to disclose hidden secrets that were not revealed even to the holy angels.”
172) He said to them, “Friends, we should complete the verse, for there are several secrets hidden in this verse, ‘I will put to death and make alive,’” meaning through the Sefirot, since life extends from the right line and death extends from the left line. But if both do not agree in the middle line, the judgment that they are three together in a seat does not hold. That is, the judgment is upheld only when there are three lines together.
Although life extends to the righteous from the right line, and death extends to the wicked from the left line, it is only once the middle line comes and decides between them, clothing the lines in one another. However, prior to the decision of the middle line there is existence neither for life—which extends to the righteous from the right line—nor to death, which extends to the wicked from the left line, since the lines are disputed—once the left wins toward the Din, and once the right wins toward the Hesed, without permanence and persistence.
173) Sometimes the three of them agree to pass judgment, and the stretched out hand will come to welcome the returning. Yad  is Yod-Dalet (14) letters—four letters in simple HaVaYaH, and ten letters in HaVaYaH with a filling. The four letters of the simple HaVaYaH are Yod-Hey Vav-Hey, implying the Sefira Keter. The ten letters in HaVaYaH with a filling are Yod-Vav-Dalet Hey-Aleph Vav-Aleph-Vav Hey-Aleph, implying the Sefira Hochma.
In Katnut, the three Sefirot Bina and TM descend from the Nukva to BYA and to the Klipot and remain only in two Sefirot, KH de Kelim. Then the Nukva is implied in the name Yad , implying the two Sefirot KH, in whom there are 14 letters, four in Keter and 10 in Hochma. Then the three of them agree to pass judgment, and even the right line agrees to the judgment because there are only 14 letters in each line from KH and his Bina and TM fell to the Klipot.
Then the Klipot acquire 28 letters of the filling of filling, implying the Kli of Bina and TM included in her, which is the power to make the lower ones sin, and also to punish them. Those two are one, as we learn, “He is the devil, he is the evil inclination, he is the angel of death,” for he is the one who makes one sin, and he is the one who ascends and slanders, and he is the one who descends and takes his soul. Thus, the sin and its punishment are one.
Through MAN and repentance and good deeds, the Nukva raises her Bina and TM back from the Klipot, and they clothe the souls of the lower ones who repented. Afterwards she lowers the Masach from NE to the Peh, raises Bina and TM to Atzilut together with the souls, is completed in ten Sefirot, and receives Mochin de Gadlut for the souls of the lower ones who are attached to the Kelim Bina and TM that rose to her.
“And the stretched out hand will come to welcome the returning.” The matter is clarified from its beginning, that from the beginning, the Nukva was diminished to staying in those 14 letters, which are KH of each of her lines, only to later welcome the returning in repentance and to raise them to Atzilut, for it was not possible to give Mochin de Gadlut to the lower ones anyway.
This is why Divinity is called “right hand” on the part of the line of Hesed, and “left hand” on the part of the line of Din, and “the hand of the Lord” on the part of the middle line, the line of Rachamim. Only 14 letters remained in each line from Nukva in Katnut, KH in each line, while Bina and TM of each one fell into BYA. When he repents, those 14 letters save him from the Din. That is, after the Nukva lowers the Masach below Hochma to its place as before, and raises Bina and TM back to her, they also rise with them through repentance and receive Mochin de Gadlut, which is the light of Rachamim.
But when the cause for all the causes sentences, the hand is not stretched out to welcome the returning. Rather, it is to the contrary, as it is written, “And there is none that can deliver out of My hand.” Meaning, all this relates to the darkness of Ima. But in the darkness of Tzimtzum Aleph, which is concealed in Atik, who is called “the cause for all the causes,” as we learn, “And the wicked shall be put to silence in darkness,” then “There is none that can deliver out of My hand.”
174) “See now that I, I am He, and there is no God with Me. I will put to death and make alive.” “I” is said three times in this verse. There are three times Aleph in the beginning of the words, and three times Yod at the end of the words, since the beginning of the word Ani  is Aleph and the end of the word is Yod. The three letters Yod imply the name SAG, which is the filling of the name HaVaYaH, Yod-Vav-Dalet Hey-Yod Vav-Aleph-Vav Hey-Yod, which are SAG (63) in Gematria. There are three letters Yod in it, and the three letters Aleph imply the filling of the name HaVaYaH in the number MA (45)—Yod-Vav-Dalet Hey-Aleph Vav-Aleph-Vav Hey-Aleph—which are MA in Gematria, in whom there are three letters Aleph.
We should also explain the words, “See now that I, I am He.” At the end of correction, when the name BON, the Nukva, returns to being as the name SAG, as it is written, “See now that I,” who was included and receiving thus far only from the name HaVaYaH filled with Alephs, Yod-Vav-Dalet Hey-Aleph Vav-Aleph-Vav Hey-Aleph, in which there are three letters Aleph, implying ZA, now at the end of correction, “I am He,” in HaVaYaH filled with SAG, in whom there are three letters Yod, implying upper Ima. The intimation, three times “I” in which there are the fillings of the two HaVaYaH relates to that. The three letters Yod de SAG and the three letters Aleph de MA are as it is written, “And the light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun.”
There are also three letters Vav in the verse —“And will make alive,” “And I,” “And there is no”—which are also implied in those two names SAG, Yod-Vav-Dalet Hey-Yod Vav-Aleph-Vav Hey-Yod, and MA, Yod-Vav-Dalet Hey-Aleph Vav-Aleph-Vav Hey-Aleph, meaning there are three letters Vav in each. Vav implies ZA, indicating that it, too, is included in those ascents that are implied in the two names. However, it amounts to HaVaYaH filled with AB, Yod-Vav-Dalet Hey-Yod Vav-Yod-Vav Hey-Yod, upper Aba.
175) The words, “See now that I, I am He” apply to the Creator and His Divinity, ZA and his Nukva. “I” is Divinity. “He” is the Creator, who is called Vav-Hey-Vav. In the future, at the end of correction, the Nukva will say, “See that I,” Vav-Hey-Vav are one, as it is written, “And the light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun,” meaning that the Nukva is equal to ZA.
“And there is no God with Me” refers to other gods, SAM and the serpent, for then it will be revealed that SAM and the serpent never separated between the Creator and His Divinity, as it is written, “By the mouth of two witnesses ... shall he that is to die be put to death,” which applies to SAM, who was dead from his beginning and was but a servant to hurry the redemption of our souls.
This is the meaning of “I will put to death and make alive.” I will put to death with My Divinity the one who is guilty, and I will make alive with my Divinity the one who is innocent. The Creator’s guidance from the beginning will appear throughout the world, and then, as it is written, “Sinners will cease from the earth, and the wicked shall be no more.” That is, unlike what it seems to us during the 6,000 years, that there is a governance that objects to Kedusha, which are SAM and the serpent, as it is written, “When man rules over man it is to his harm,” then it will appear to all—“I will put to death and make alive” with My Divinity, and there is none else besides Him.
The words, “And there is none that can deliver out of My hand” is 14 letters in the name HaVaYaH, which are four letters of simple HaVaYaH, and ten letters of HaVaYaH filled with Alephs, Yod-Vav-Dalet Hey-Aleph Vav-Aleph-Vav Hey-Aleph, and the 14 letters in the names KOZO BaMOChSaZ KOZO . That is, the three lines called three hands because in each line are the 14 letters of the name. There are 14 letters HaVaYaH Elokeinu HaVaYaH  on the right line. There are 14 letters KOZO BaMOChSaZ KOZO on the left line, and there are 14 letters from the simple HaVaYaH and from the filled HaVaYaH in the middle line.
Those are the names HaVaYaH Elokeinu HaVaYaH and KOZO BaMOChSaZ KOZO, and the two lines that extend from Holam and Shuruk, and they are GAR. But the middle line extends from the Hirik, VAK without a Rosh, which is extended over the Masach de Behina Aleph. This is why there are 14 letters there—simple HaVaYaH and filled HaVaYaH—implying KH de Kelim and Ruach Nefesh of lights. Bina and TM de Kelim are missing, which are the 28 letters of the filling of filling in HaVaYaH: Yod-Vav-Dalet Vav-Aleph-Vav Dalet-Lamed-Tav, Hey-Aleph Aleph-Lamed-Peh, Vav-Aleph-Vav Aleph-Lamed-Peh Vav-Aleph-Vav, Hey-Aleph Aleph-Lamed-Peh.
It is so because the filling of the filling of Yod is Yod-Vav-Dalet Vav-Aleph-Vav Dalet-Lamed-Tav, and the filling of the filling of Hey is Hey-Aleph Aleph-Lamed-Peh, and the filling of the filling of Vav is Vav-Aleph-Vav Aleph-Lamed-Peh Vav-Aleph-Vav, and the bottom Hey is Hey-Aleph Aleph-Lamed-Peh, as it is written, “The hand upon the throne of the Lord: the Lord will have war with Amalek from generation to generation.” It is so because there are only 14 letters in the middle line. Therefore, there are only Yod-Hey there, lacking the letters Vav-Hey, which are 28 letters of the filling of the filling. All that is because the Lord has war with Amalek. This is the prayer of Moses, as it is written, “And now let the power of the Lord be great,” meaning let the 28 letters be extended to the 14 letters and the name HaVaYaH will be completed with ten Sefirot de Kelim and NRNHY of lights.
“And there is none that can deliver out of My hand” is the 14 letters in the name HaVaYaH, referring to those two hands, which are 14 letters in the middle line, which is deficient of GAR. This is why she avenges the wicked. The 14 letters on the left line, which are KOZO BaMOChSaZ KOZO, which are also Dinim, and she avenges the wicked and they disclose the complete unification. In the future, all will see that there is none that can deliver out of My hand because they had brought the end of correction.
It is all true, both the first interpretation and the second interpretation, and also what the friends said in explaining the verse. But what was said above, that the upper cause, the cause of all the causes, is the one who said, “I, I am He, Atik de Atzilut, when the Zivug of the hidden Malchut appears, as the cornerstone. That secret was not given to all the sages and prophets, meaning it was given only to a chosen few among them.
176) There are several causes, degrees, that are hidden and unknown. Rather, they are clothed and assembled into the Sefirot, and the Sefirot are Merkavot to them. Like a Merkava  that discloses the presence of the one who rides it, the Sefirot reveal the degrees clothed within them.
The degrees hang down and emerge from one another by way of cause and consequence, where each lower one is affected by its superior and exists through it. There are causes that are hidden from the lower ones. These are the first three Partzufim, AA and AVI. It is so because the disclosure begins from YESHSUT onward, and he says about those first three, “There are several hidden causes and they are unknown.” Rather, they clothe in the Sefirot, which are YESHSUT and ZON that become a Merkava for them, appearing within them like a rider who is revealed only in his carriage.
Those first three are hidden from the thoughts of people, as it is written, “For one higher than the high watches, and there are higher than they.” The lights are polished by one another, where every one that is higher than the other is also more polished. And those who receive are darker than the ones above them, from whom they receive. That is, each one that is lower than the other is darker than him. And although with regard to the lower one, he is considered a sparkling light, with respect to the upper one, he is regarded as darkness, because so the degrees gradually diminish from one another. But the cause of all causes, there is no light that can stand before him, for all the lights darken and quench before him.
Let Us Make Man
177) “Let us make man in our image, after our likeness.” The friends interpreted it to the ministering angels saying this verse to the Creator. Rabbi Shimon told them, “Since the angels know the present and what was to be, they knew that the man would sin, so why did they want to make the man, for they said, ‘Let us make man’?”
178) Moreover, the angels Aza and Azael were slandering the creation of man, since when Divinity told the Creator, “Let us make man,” they said, “What is man, that You should know him?” Why do You wish to create the man when You know that he will sin before You with his wife, who is darkness, since light is the male and darkness is female, who is from the left line, considered darkness of Beria?
After the Gadlut of ZON that they obtained during the six days of creation, when they rose and clothed upper AVI, ZON elicited Adam HaRishon. The order of his creation was first in Katnut, then in Gadlut, the same as all the works of creation came out. In the verses, “Let there be light,” “Let there be a firmament,” “Let there be lights,” the diminutions that brought the Katnut came out. In the verse, “And there was light,” “And God made the firmament,” “And God made the two  lights,” their Gadlut came out, returning the letters ELEH.
Similarly, here in the verse, “Let us make man,” there was a diminution where the Nukva lowered her letters ELEH to BYA, by which the Nukva diminished into VAK without a Rosh, and with her all the angels, who are her hosts. In the verse, “And God created the man,” the Gadlut came out.
The friends said that He called the groups over groups of high angels, sat them before Him, and told them, “I wish to create a man.” That is, the ZON were diminished into VAK, and with them all the angels of above when He wished to create the man. They implied it in the words “Sat them before Him,” since sitting indicates diminution of level, for the level is complete only during standing, but in sitting, the level shortens. Thus, all the angels were diminished into VAK without a Rosh.
This is why all the angels were excited and asked about the nature of this man for whom You have diminished us. He told them, “The man, who was created in our image, his wisdom will be greater than your wisdom.” That is, once the ZON return the letters ELEH to their degree, the worlds BYA will rise along with them to Atzilut, and the man will attain NRN de Atzilut, which is immensely higher than the angels. Then all the angels will rise thanks to him to Atzilut, as it truly was on the sixth day prior to the sin. And when the angels heard it, they immediately agreed to his creation.
This is why the friends said that the angels themselves agreed and said, “Let us make man” in this verse, since the Creator told them that through him, they will all attain ascension to Atzilut. And Rabbi Shimon told them about it, “Since they knew what was to be, that he would sin and would lose all the Mochin de Atzilut once more, and would fall back to BYA, and all the angels with him, why did they agree to make the man, since they would lose more than they had gained at the time?
“Moreover, Aza and Azael were slandering the creation of the man. The angels knew that they would sin, so Aza and Azael promptly slandered and announced that the man would sin. Still, all the angels agreed. At that time Divinity said to them, ‘That thing that you are slandering, you will fall by it,’ as it is written, ‘And the sons of God saw the daughters of the man that they were good, and took for them women from all that they chose,’ and Divinity dropped them from their Kedusha.
“And why did Aza and Azael not agree with man’s creation, as did all the high angels? All the Mochin de Gadlut that come out during the 6,000 years are not from GAR de AB, but from VAK de AB. Know that those angels, Aza and Azael, extend from Achoraim of the inner AVI that operated in Nekudim, who are GAR de AB that were concealed and do not appear during the 6,000 years.
“It therefore follows that this reply that the Creator replied to all the high angels, that the man, who is created in our image, his wisdom will be greater than your wisdom, for which they all agreed to be diminished during the saying, ‘Let us make man,’ that reply was not at all sufficient for Aza and Azael because since their essence is from GAR de AB, then all the great Mochin of Adam HaRishon, even the Mochin from before the sin, do not belong to their essence at all, for they were all only from VAK de AB. For this reason, they would not gain anything by the man’s creation, which is why they were unlike all the high angels and slandered the creation of the man because they did not want to be diminished for his creation.
“They increased their slandering even more after he sinned. After the Creator created the man and he sinned, Aza and Azael came before the Creator and said, ‘We have something to say to You: The man that You have made sinned before You.’ Because of their slandering, the man was delayed in his repentance, which is why it was said, ‘That thing that you are slandering, you will fall by it,’ for because of your slandering the man will be deprived of repenting right after the sin, and the daughters of the man will come out uncorrected, and you will eventually fornicate after them.”
179) The friends told him: “Rabbi, in the end, Aza and Azael did not lie in their words. Divinity should have replied to them, at least answer their slandering because it was true that the man would sin because of the Nukva, as Aza and Azael said, for it is written, ‘The woman whom You have given with me gave me of the tree and I ate.’”
He replied to them: “So said Divinity: ‘You, Aza and Azael, came to slander before me more than all the hosts of above. If you were better than the man in your deeds, you would be right to slander him. But the man will sin with only one woman, and you with many women. Thus, your sins are more numerous than the sins of people, as it is written, ‘And the sons of the God saw the daughters of the man that they were good.’ It did not say, ‘The daughter of the man,’ but ‘The daughters of the man,’ many daughters. Moreover, Adam sinned, and I have already prepared for him repentance to correct what he had sinned, since repentance preceded the world. But to angels, repentance does not help at all.’”
Divinity gave them two answers: 1) It is not for you to slander whatsoever because you are worse than the man. 2) If the man should sin, I have prepared for him the correction of repentance in advance, and he will correct what he had sinned.
180) The friends replied to him: “Why then is all that? Meaning, if the whole reason for the creation of man is that he can repent and correct his corruption, then what is all that for? It would have been better not to create the darkness in the Nukva, and the man would not sin to begin with.”
Rabbi Shimon replied to the friends: “Were it not so, that the Creator created the good inclination and the evil inclination, which are light and darkness, there would not be Mitzvot and transgressions for Adam de Beria. But Adam  was created from both, from light and darkness, which is why the writing says, “See, I have set before you this day life and good, and death and evil,” meaning this is why there are Mitzvot and transgressions in man, and the choice has been prepared for him, to choose between good and evil.”
They replied to him: “What is all that for? It would be better if the darkness were not created and there would not be reward or punishment for man, rather than being created, sinning, and causing all those many corruptions that he has caused by his sin.”
181) He said to them, “It was right to create him in light and in darkness because the Torah was created for the man, for punishment to the wicked and reward for the righteous are written in it, and there cannot be reward and punishment unless in Adam de Beria, who consists of light and darkness, as it is written, ‘He created it not a waste, He formed it to be inhabited.’ That is, the world was not created to be in chaos, in darkness, for the wicked. Rather, ‘He formed it to be inhabited,’ to give a good reward to the righteous.
“The reward is the obtainment of the Torah, as it is written, ‘For the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord,’ since the Torah and the Creator are one. And if the man were not created in light and darkness, in which choice between good and bad and reward and punishment are possible, it would not be possible for that good reward that is received in the Torah, and for which it was created, to be revealed to the righteous.”
The friends told him: “Indeed, we heard now what we have not heard thus far. Now it is clear that the Creator did not create something that He does not need.”
182) Moreover, the Torah de Beria, in whom there are light and darkness, reward and punishment, is a clothing of Divinity. If man were not destined to be created, Divinity would be without a clothing like one who is poor without clothes. Because of that, anyone who sins is as though he stripped the clothes from Divinity, and this is the punishment of the sinful person.
183) Anyone who keeps the Mitzvot of the Torah, it is as though he dresses Divinity with her clothes. This is why they interpreted the verse that is said about the Talit  and the Tzitzit , “For that is his only covering, it is his garment for his skin; in what shall he lay?” This relates to the exile, for then Divinity was stripped from her clothes by Israel’s sins and it was said about her, “In what shall he lay?”
The darkness of Beria is darkness of Ima, ZAT de Bina, clothing AA from his Chazeh to the Tabur. They are called “lower AVI.” It was said above that upper Ima had an appellation whose number is 86, like the number of Elokim, and that appellation is light and darkness. And because of that darkness in that appellation, Aba said that Adam de Beria would sin, as Adam de Beria is the light of the upper clothing.
The darkness of Beria, which makes Adam de Beria sin, is the appellation of upper Ima. The darkness of Ima is a clothing for the upper light because that darkness is done through the ascent of the restricted Malchut to the place of Bina, Ima, and the letters ELEH, Bina and TM de Ima, descended to the place of the Nukva. Also, Bina and TM de Nukva descend to NRN of people, and Ima remains in MI de Elokim, KH de Kelim and VAK without a Rosh of lights. Also, the Nukva was darkened in VAK without a Rosh, and she is the darkness that was created in the appellation of Ima.
However, Ima did that on purpose, since by raising MAN from the Torah and good deeds of the lower ones, Ima then returns her letters ELEH and the name Elokim is completed in her. Also, the Nukva, who clothed the letters ELEH, rises with them to Ima, returns her letters ELEH, and the name Elokim is completed in her, as well. Then NRN of people also rise with the letters ELEH of the Nukva to the place of Ima, where they receive the Mochin in Ima.
Therefore, these letters ELEH are considered the upper clothing since they rise from the place of the lower one to the upper one, clothing the upper one once more, as they were prior to their fall to the place of the lower one. This is why the Mochin that the lower one receives upon his ascent with them to the upper one is called “light of the upper clothing,” since he receives the light through those letters ELEH that returned and became clothing for the upper one.
It was said above that people cannot receive the upper light unless through clothing. It was said that Adam de Beria would sin, that he is a light for the upper clothing because if the lower ones corrupt their works, the upper Zivug stops and the letters ELEH de ZON fall to BYA once again, to the place of Klipot. The letters ELEH de Ima fall to the place of ZON, and the darkness in the upper ones comes out again, since they return to VAK without a Rosh. Thus, the man causes diminution and blemish to Adam de Beria because he receives the light of the upper clothing, and through the sin the clothing—the letters ELEH—returns and he falls into the Klipot.
The Torah de Beria is a clothing of Divinity, since the Torah and good deeds in which Adam de Beria engages elevate the letters ELEH of Divinity from BYA to Atzilut and become her clothing. Also, Ima returns her letters ELEH with the Nukva, raises them to her place, and receives the great Mochin in the place of Ima. Thus, the Torah de Beria becomes a clothing for Divinity.
It was said that repentance preceded the world. It is so because the world had to be created in the darkness of Beria, to lower the letters ELEH from the degrees, which causes darkness in the world. The man sinned because of the darkness, and repentance had been prepared for him. Through the repentance, he returns the letters ELEH, and the light—which is the purpose of creation—is extended to the world.
If the man were not destined to be created and there would not be the matter of raising the letters ELEH from BYA to Atzilut, Divinity would be without clothes, like a poor man, without the great Mochin de Ima, for by raising her letters ELEH from BYA she can rise to Ima with the letters ELEH de Ima and receive the Mochin from her. If the man were not created, the Nukva would not have Mochin and she would be considered poor. Thus, all the clothes of the Nukva are only because of the darkness of Ima, which is the darkness of Beria.
Darkness is the black in the Torah, the ink in her letters. Light is the white in the Torah, the parchments on which the letters are written. When the light clothes in darkness, it is written about the Torah, “I am black and beautiful.” When the light—the white in the Torah—departs there, the Torah says, “Do not see me that I am swarthy.”
ZA is called “Torah.” His Mochin are the light of Torah, the white in her. The clothes of the Mochin, the darkness of Ima, are the letters ELEH de Ima, the black in the Torah. When the Mochin de Ima clothe in darkness—the letters ELEH in her—ZA says, “I am black and beautiful,” since those clothes are the reason for all his Mochin. But when the light departs from the clothes and the clothes fall from Ima once again, as do the clothes of ZON, their letters ELEH fall to BYA once again. Then ZA, the Torah, says, “Do not see me that I am swarthy,” since then the Klipot cling to his black, as he is in BYA and devoid of light.
If he is rewarded, it becomes a potion of life to him, since all the Mochin of one who engages in Torah extend to him through the black in the Torah, and the black becomes clothing over the white.
If he is not rewarded, it becomes a potion of death to him because then the Mochin depart from their clothes and the clothes fall into the Klipot and become a potion of death to him.
A Prayer for the Poor
184) If the prayer is incomplete, several harm-doing angels chase it, as it is written, “All her pursuers overtook her.” This is why we pray, “And He is merciful, will atone an iniquity and will not destroy, and He numerously subsides His anger and will not evoke all of His wrath,” corresponding to the four Klipot: 1) “Will atone an iniquity” corresponding to SAM and the serpent. 2) “Will not destroy” corresponding to the Klipa called “destroyer.” 3) “And He numerously subsides His anger” corresponding to the Klipa called “anger.” 4) “And will not evoke all of His anger” corresponding to the Klipa called “wrath.”
We pray that those four Klipot will not chase after the prayer. Several harm-doing angels hang down from those four Klipot. They are seven appointees, and seventy are hanging in them, and those seventy appointees slander in every firmament through which the prayer passes, and then 700,000,000 (seven hundred million) harm-doing angels hang down from them.
185) If the prayer rises in completeness, which is in a Talit of Mitzva and in a Tefillin on the head and arm, it is written about them, “And all the people’s of the earth shall see that the name of the Lord is called upon you.” The name of the Lord is a head Tefillin, and anyone who sees the name HaVaYaH on the head in a prayer, which is the name ADNI, quickly runs away, as it is written, “A thousand will fall at Your side, and ten thousand at Your right.”
186) Because Jacob saw in the spirit of holiness the pressure in the last exile at the end of days, it was said about him, “And Jacob was very much afraid and distressed.” He divided the holy nation in the exile into three Behinot , as it is written, “And he put the handmaids and their children first,” upfront, in the exile of Edom. “...and Leah and her children after, and Rachel and Joseph last.”
It is so because three Behinot are discerned in the Partzuf Nukva de ZA: 1) Her HBD HGT from Chazeh and above. This is Leah. 2) Her TNHY from Chazeh and below, which is Rachel. 3) Her Malchut, which is considered the handmaids, since Malchut de Nukva is called “the end of days,” meaning the end of the Sefirot, for the Sefirot are called “days.” To correct her, Israel suffer the exile of Edom.
Also, the children of Israel divide by the three Behinot in the Nukva: the children of Leah, the children of Rachel, and the children of the handmaids. “And he put the handmaids and their children first.” They are the first in the exile in Edom because the grip of the Klipot is primarily in them, as they are from Malchut of the Malchut. However, the first two Behinot, which are the sons of Leah and the sons of Rachel, are corrected in and of themselves, but suffer because of the flaw in the third Behina, Malchut de Malchut, for all three Behinot are ten Sefirot of a single Partzuf.
Those three Behinot are of the value of NRN because the children of the handmaids are considered Nefesh, the children of Leah, HBD HGT de Kelim with NR of lights, are considered Ruach, and the children of Rachel, in the sense that they complement the ten Sefirot in the Kelim TNHY from Chazeh and below, are considered Neshama.
And because he later saw their meagerness and affliction, he said and prayed for them, “And I shall return to my father’s house in peace,” meaning that they will be rewarded with being redeemed and arriving at the Temple. He prayed for them that He would give them bread to eat and clothes to wear, so the Klipot would not grow strong over them and arrest their abundance.
187) David said about Divinity, about that exile, “Hungry, and weary, and thirsty in the desert,” for he saw her desolate and dry, and felt for the affliction of Divinity. Although David himself is from Chazeh and above, for he is from the children of Leah, the matter of the exile in Edom relates to Malchut de Malchut from Chazeh and below. He sympathized with her affliction and prayed for her although she is not his own Behina.
After he saw Israel returning in repentance with joy, he set up ten kinds of psalms, in the last of which he said, “A prayer for David, ‘Lend Your ear, O Lord, and answer me, for I am poor and meager.’” He saw that all the prayers that are with a tune were received late by the King, and would not enter Him until the prayer of the poor entered. This is why he placed the prayer of the poor before all the prayers.
It is so because after Israel repented and raised MAN through Torah and good deeds, returning ZON PBP  because the construction of the Partzuf of Nukva was completed, then David set up ten kinds of psalms corresponding to the ten Sefirot de Nukva.
It is presented that there are three Behinot in the ten Sefirot of Partzuf Nukva: Leah, Rachel, handmaids. During the 6,000 years, only Leah and Rachel, who are her nine Sefirot, can be corrected in full. But the handmaids, who are her Malchut, will be fully corrected only at the end of correction. This is why that Malchut is called “the end of days.” It therefore follows that he corrected only nine kinds of psalms with the proper completeness, corresponding to Leah and Rachel. But the tenth one, corresponding Malchut, David could not correct as it should be.
At the end of all of them David said a prayer, “For I am poor and meager.” It is so because at the end of them all, opposite Malchut, he could not correct her and properly say a psalm with a proper tune. This is why he said a prayer without a tune. He said that in this Behina he is poor and meager and cannot extend to her any abundance because she is about to be corrected only at the end of correction and not before.
Yet, she still has some correction during the 6,000 years prior to the end of correction in a clothing of Mitzva. Moreover, before that last Behina receives that beginning of her correction, no correction will be made in the first nine of Malchut. He saw that all the complete prayers that are with a tune, meaning the nine kinds of psalms that correspond to the first two Behinot of Nukva, Leah and Rachel, which are fit to receive their entire correction during the 6,000 years, as well, are still belated to enter the King and will not enter to receive their correction before the third and last Behina, her Malchut, called “a prayer for the poor,” enters first to receive the beginning of her correction in a clothing of Mitzva.
It is written, “A prayer for the poor when he wraps.” The poor envelops and detains all the previous prayers until his prayer enters, the prayer of the poor. “Wrapping” means detaining, as it is written, “The wrapped ones were Laban’s.” This is why the prayer of the poor comes before all the prayers, and this is why it was said, “A prayer for the poor when he wraps.” Because he must enter first, he detains the others.
188) The prayer of the poor is the evening prayer, the Nukva, when she has her own authority. It is so because then the Nukva is without her husband. And because she is without her husband, she is poor and dry without abundance, and she is under the domain of any person, meaning that anyone enslaves her with his ways and deeds. This is the seed of Jacob, who are in the domain of all the nations of the world, for all the nations enslave them under their authority. It is similar to the evening prayer, for as the Nukva is considered the evening prayer, it is in the domain of any person, likewise, the seed of Jacob are in the exile in the authority of the nations of the world.
There are three prayers—morning, afternoon, and evening. The first two prayers correct the first two Behinot of the Nukva, her first nine, which are fit to receive their own corrections, hence they are a Mitzva. The evening prayer is permission, as it is a correction of the third Behina of the Nukva, her Malchut, who has no correction during the 6,000 years. This is why she is considered her own authority without her husband because she has no Zivug with her husband until the end of correction.
189) The Sabbath prayer is charity for the poor, as we learn, “Sun on a Sabbath, charity for the poor.” ZA is called “the sun.” On Sabbath, he has a Zivug PBP with the Nukva, like upper AVI, and then Behina Gimel of the Nukva, her Malchut, receives her abundance, too, although not because she is then complete in and of herself, for she is not completed prior to the end of correction. Rather, because of the complete lights of upper AVI that illuminate on the Sabbath day, the abundance reaches Behina Gimel, too, although she is unfit.
This is why the abundance that she receives is called “charity,” indicating that she herself is unfit for the abundance, but that she is sustained by others, as we learn, “Sun on a Sabbath, charity for the poor.” What Behina Gimel de Nukva receives from the sun on Sabbath, ZA, is only as charity because prior to the end of correction she is still unfit for that great abundance.
This is why a person should make himself as a poor man at the king’s gate in the Standing Prayer of all six weekdays, for Divinity, to feel for the affliction of Divinity, as did David, and to be wrapped in a wrapping of Mitzva, the Talit with Tzitziot , like a poor man. And with the Tefillin, he should be like a meager man at the king’s gate, which is ADNI, which has the same count as Heichal , since ADNI in Gematria is 65, as the count of Heichal.
The Nukva is called ADNI, and divides into three Behinot. In the first two Behinot, she is considered the Heichal of the king, for ADNI in Gematria is Heichal. In the third Behina, she is considered the king’s gate, for it is impossible to come into the king’s palace, ZA, except through the king’s gate. Likewise, a man should wrap himself with a Tzitzit like a poor man, and with a Tefillin, like a meager one, to extend from the start the beginning of the correction for Behina Gimel de Nukva—the prayer of the poor who detains all the prayers and all the corrections.
This is why in that sense she is like a gate; she is the beginning of the entrance to the palace, as it is written, “ADNI , open my lips,” for in the correction of Behina Gimel the lips open and it is possible to begin to pray the rest of the prayers and not before. Afterwards he will extend to the Nukva all of her corrections, which are needed for her first two Behinot, which are the actual palace.
190) When a person opens his mouth on the weekdays, in the evening prayer, the eagle comes down to receive with his wings the night prayer. That eagle is called Nuriel. He is called Uriel on the part of Hesed, and he is called Nuriel on the part of Gevura, as he is a burning fire, as it is written in Daniel, “A river of fire comes out before him.”
191) In the morning prayer, the lion comes down to receive the prayer in his arms and in his wings. There are four wings to each animal, and this is Angel Michael. In the afternoon prayer the ox comes down to receive the prayer with his horns and with his wings, and this is Angel Gabriel.
A prayer is the Nukva. Through our prayers, we bring her near for a Zivug with her husband, ZA. The three prayers correspond to her three lines: the morning prayer is the right line, Hesed; the afternoon prayer is the left line, Gevura; and the evening prayer is the middle line, Tifferet. Abraham established the morning prayer, Hesed, Isaac the afternoon prayer, Gevura, and Jacob the evening prayer, Tifferet.
The Nukva does not rise to the Zivug by herself. Rather, there are four animals that carry the throne, the Nukva, to the Zivug with ZA: a lion, an ox, an eagle, and a man. This is above Chazeh de ZON. Below Chazeh de ZON they are Shinan . In the three prayers of the weekdays, the lower animals, Shinan, carry the Nukva for the Zivug. On the Sabbath, the upper animals, from Chazeh and above, carry her to the Zivug, and those three lower animals—lion, ox, and eagle—are called Michael, Gabriel, Uriel, and Nuriel.
In the morning prayer, the lion comes down to receive the prayer. This is Angel Michael. It is so because in the morning prayer is the Zivug of the right, Hesed. This is why the lion comes down to receive the prayer and raise it for a Zivug because lion is Hesed and the angel Michael. In the afternoon prayer, the ox comes down to receive the prayer. This is Angel Gabriel, since in the afternoon prayer is the Zivug on the left line, Gevura. This is why the ox comes down, to receive the prayer and raise it for a Zivug, since the ox is Gevura and Angel Gabriel.
In the evening prayer is the Zivug on the middle line, Tifferet, only from the Gevura of the middle line, called Nuriel, and the eagle comes down to receive the prayer and raise it for a Zivug, which is the middle line, Tifferet, but in Nuriel in the eagle, not in Uriel in the eagle, since at night is the time of Dinim in the eagle, while the Gevurot come from Behina Gimel de Nukva, which is a prayer for the poor when she is in a domain without her husband. These Gevurot do not mitigate so she is fit for a Zivug unless with the Gevurot above, which come from the point of Hirik in Bina, the left side of Tifferet, the Masach de Hirik on which the level of Hassadim comes out, deciding between the two lines, right and left.
Angel Uriel is extended from the level of Hassadim in it, and Angel Nuriel is extended from the force of the Din in the Masach. Therefore, the evening prayer is not mitigated to become fit for a Zivug unless by Angel Nuriel because his Gevurot have already been mitigated in Bina, in Midat ha Rachamim. It is written about him, “As an eagle that stirs up his nest.”
192) On Sabbath, the Creator comes down in three patriarchs, HGT, from Chazeh de ZON and above, to receive with them the only daughter, the prayer, the Nukva. On the Sabbath day, the upper animals, HGT, above the Chazeh, carry the Nukva for a Zivug. Thus, the Creator, ZA, receives the only daughter with three fathers, HGT, the upper animals. This is the secret of the Sabbath, who is an acronym, Shin, Bet-Tav. The three lines in the letter Shin  imply the three patriarchs, HGT, since the Creator accepts the prayer—the Sabbath, His only daughter—in three patriarchs, meaning in the three upper animals from Chazeh and above, who are called “upper Merkava.”
At that time the upper animals, called HaVaYaH, start and say, “Lift up your heads, O gates ... that the King of glory may come.” Behina Gimel of the Nukva is called “the king’s gate.” She receives her full completeness on the Sabbath day, as we learn, “Sun on a Sabbath, charity for the poor.” This is the meaning of the animals carrying the throne for a Zivug saying at that time, “Lift up your heads, O gates,” that they are perfected with the perfection of Behina Gimel, called “a gate,” and the illuminations extending from her are called “gates.”
193) At that time, seven palaces open: 1) Love, 2) Fear, 3) Mercy , 4) Prophecy in terms of the illuminating mirror, 5) Prophecy in terms of the mirror that does not illuminate, 6) Tzedek , 7) Din . They correspond to the seven Sefirot HGT NHYM: love opposite Hesed, fear opposite Gevura, Rachamim opposite Tifferet, the illuminating mirror opposite Netzah, the mirror that does not illuminate opposite Hod, Tzedek opposite Yesod, and Din opposite Malchut.
There are seven Sefirot HGT NHYM in Nukva de ZA, each contains all, and each of them contains HGT NHYM. The Sefira Malchut in each is a palace, which is why Nukva has seven palaces. Only the first two Behinot of Malchut are a palace, but her Behina Gimel is the palace gate. Therefore, on weekdays, when there is no correction at all to Malchut’s Behina Gimel, all seven palaces have closed and hidden gates. Only on the Sabbath day, when the correction reaches Behina Gimel, too, all the gates are corrected and the palaces open.
194) It is said about them that Beresheet  has the letters of Barah  Sheet , six palaces. Elokim is the seventh palace because the whole correction of the Sabbath is due to the ascent of Nukva to Bina when she receives her lights. For the correction of the seven palaces of the Nukva, Bina was also set up with seven palaces, implied in the verse Beresheet Barah Elokim , for on the Sabbath day they illuminate to the seven palaces of the Nukva.
There are seven palaces from Chazeh downward, and seven palaces from Chazeh and above. Those seven palaces of Bina, implied in the verse, “In the beginning God created,” were established in her in doubles, seven palaces above the Chazeh, and seven palaces below the Chazeh. It is likewise in each Partzuf. Those seven doubled palaces are discerned in the general five Partzufim of Atzilut, in AA who includes them. There are seven palaces above Chazeh de AA, in AVI, who clothe him there, and there are also seven palaces from Chazeh de AA and below, in ZON, who clothe him there. All that applies to the general, applies also in every detail. This is why there are seven doubled palaces in each Partzuf—seven from Chazeh and above and seven from Chazeh and below.
Opposite them are seven voices in the psalm, “Give to the Lord, O sons of gods,” and the 18 mentions, the 18 names HaVaYaH that are in it, in which the Creator roams in 18 worlds, as it is written, “The vehicles of God are myriads, thousands upon thousands,” which are 180,000 worlds. Opposite the seven palaces below and the seven palaces above in Bina—who are upper AVI, as it is written, “In the beginning God created”—there are their opposites in ZON, too, implied by the seven voices and 18 mentions in the psalms, “Give to the Lord, O sons of gods.” Seven voices imply the seven palaces from Chazeh de ZON and above, and the 18 mentions imply the seven palaces from Chazeh de ZON and below.
The Sefirot from Chazeh and above, HGT, are primarily the middle line, Tifferet. The Sefirot from Chazeh and below, NHY, are primarily the middle line, Yesod. This is why the seven palaces from Chazeh and above, are considered to be in Tifferet, and the seven palaces from Chazeh and below in Yesod, called “the one who lives  forever.” The seven voices in the psalm, “Give to the Lord,” imply the seven palaces above, in Tifferet, since Tifferet is called “a voice,” and the number 18 mentions indicates Yesod, called “the one who lives forever.” This is why it says that 18 mentions imply the seven palaces below, in Yesod, called “lives” .
This is why it was said that the 18 mentions are 18 names of HaVaYaH that are in it, in which the Creator roams in 18 worlds. In the seven palaces below the Chazeh, ZA gives through his Yesod, called “18 worlds,” since the seven palaces below stand in Yesod de ZON, as it is written, “The vehicles of God are myriads, thousands upon thousands,” which are 180,000 worlds, since all the Behinot from Chazeh down are a Merkava to the Behinot from Chazeh and above. This is why the seven palaces are called “The vehicles of God,” as they are a Merkava to Bina, Elokim, in the seven palaces above, Yod-Hey.
“Myriads, thousands upon thousands” imply 18,000, since myriads are 20,000, “thousands” are 2,000, “upon thousands” means that they are gone , indicating 20,000 minus 2,000 that are gone, thus 18,000. Hence, the vehicle of God is seven palaces below the Chazeh, 18,000, as this number implies Yesod, “the one who lives forever,” and they are 180,000 worlds.
There are several guards of the gates by the palaces, who receive the prayer. Each prayer enters only by measure and weight. A measure is VAK, light of Hassadim in completeness. Weight is GAR, since they are drawn by the Shekel of the sanctuary and the prayer is accepted only by extending Mochin in VAK and in GAR. If the measure and weight are not complete, the prayer is not accepted.
195) There is no one to stand before the gate of prayer, to prevent it from being accepted. It is written about it, “They shall not be put to shame for they speak with their enemies at the gate.” “At the gate” is the king’s gate, the gate of the palace, since the grip of the Klipot is primarily at the gate, Behina Gimel. This is why if he extends the Mochin in measure and weight, it is written about him, “A thousand may fall at Your side, and ten thousand at Your right; it will not approach you.” That is, all the Klipot and the slanderers flee and depart from the gates of prayer, and then the prayer is accepted.
A righteous who extends Mochin is regarded as struggling with the Klipot and chasing them away from the king’s gate. This is why the text implies in regard to him, “They shall not be put to shame for they speak with their enemies at the gate,” since the prayer is a Mitzva, and it is Divinity, Nukva de ZA. The Torah is the Creator, ZA, and there must not be a cessation between them for they need to chase away the Klipot that separate the Creator from His Divinity, as it is written, “The quarrelsome separates the champion.” This is done by extending Mochin in measure and in weight.
The Torah and the Mitzva should be elevated through fear and love because all the positive and negative Mitzvot  depend on the name HaVaYaH, as it is explained that the number of the letters Shin-Mem-Yod, which is 350, along with the number of the letters Yod-Hey, which is 15, add up to 365, which are the 365 negative Mitzvot. And the number Zayin-Chaf-Reish-Yod, which is 237, with the number Vav-Hey, which is 11, add up to 248, which are the 248 positive Mitzvot. Thus, there are 365 and 248 in the name HaVaYaH, 365 in Yod-Hey, and 248 in Vav-Hey. Therefore, all 613 Mitzvot depend on the name HaVaYaH.
It is so because upper AVI—Yod de HaVaYaH, GAR de Bina—are fear. YESHSUT—Hey de HaVaYaH, ZAT de Bina—are love. Therefore, when the Mochin de ZON come only from YESHSUT, Hey de HaVaYaH, it is considered that love preceded fear. And when they also come from upper AVI, Yod de HaVaYaH, it is considered that the fear preceded love, since Yod is fear and Hey is love. Thus, fear preceded love.
ZA, the Torah, and Nukva, the Mitzva, must be raised with fear and love to upper AVI, with fear preceding love, for then the positive and negative Mitzvot are included in the name HaVaYaH, as it is written, “This is My name forever, and this is My remembrance for all generations.” “My name” with Yod Hey is the 365 negative Mitzvot, and “My remembrance” with Vav Hey is the 248 positive Mitzvot. Thus, the 365 negative Mitzvot, fear, are implied in GAR, Yod-Hey, and the 248 positive Mitzvot, love, are implied in VAK, Vav-Hey.
But if they do not raise the ZON up to AVI, but only up to YESHSUT, who is love, then the 365 negative Mitzvot are still not included in ZON because they are above, in upper AVI, who includes only 248 positive Mitzvot. When the 365 and 248 rose to AVI, they have all 613—365 from upper AVI, and 248 from YESHSUT.
196) There are 248 words in the Shema reading. They were given from love and from fear in the letter Hey de HaVaYaH. In the Shema reading, we extend only Mochin de VAK, which are only from YESHSUT, Hey de HaVaYaH, in which love precedes fear. Therefore, there are only 248 words there opposite the 248 positive Mitzvot, which is love. The 365 negative Mitzvot do not illuminate in them because they are in the letter Yod. For this reason, they set up to first bless the Shema reading, “Who chooses His people, Israel, with love,” indicating that we extend only the love in the Shema reading, which is 248 positive Mitzvot. Also, those 248 positive Mitzvot are included in Abraham because Abraham is 248 in Gematria, love, and it is written about him, “The seed of Abraham, who love Me.”
197) Tefillin are called Oz , since they were given from fear to the left, and this is the name, “The fear of Isaac.” This is so because all the slanderers come up there to demand all the Dinim in the worlds. This is why the verse, “And by the arm of His strength,” applies to the Tefillin, since Yod-Hey are fear and Vav-Hey are love, and it is written, “Love the Lord, all His followers,” which means extension of Mochin de VAK, Vav-Hey.
The Shema reading is love, and 248 positive Mitzvot in the letters Vav-Hey. Likewise, Abraham is 248 in Vav-Hey. But Tefillin is Mochin de GAR, 365 negative Mitzvot in Yod-Hey, the fear in Yod-Hey, left line, the fear of Isaac. All the slanderers and the Dinim in the world have a grip only in the left line.
It follows that Abraham is Vav-Hey, Isaac is Yod-Hey, but Tifferet, HaVaYaH, includes everything. The middle line includes the two lines: Abraham, Vav-Hey, and Isaac, Yod-Hey. This is why it is written about Jacob, “And behold, the Lord stood over him,” and it is not written so in Abraham and in Isaac because Jacob is Tifferet, who includes everything, as he is the middle pillar, and when he is called Jacob he includes the quality of Abraham, Vav-Hey, and the 248 positive Mitzvot. Afterwards, when he is called “Israel,” indicating that he rose and clothed the Yod-Hey, too, and includes the entire name HaVaYaH, GAR and VAK, then the name HaVaYaH is regarded as being filled with Alephs, for were it not filled with Alephs, Israel would not be able to clothe the Yod-Hey.
The Zohar says in several places that the right line extends from the point of Holam, from MI de Elokim, which is GAR, and the left line extends from the point of Shuruk, from the letters ELEH of Elokim, which is VAK. But here it says that the right line, Abraham, is VAK, Vav-Hey de HaVaYaH, and the left line, Isaac, is GAR, Yod-Hey de HaVaYaH. It is so because there is a big difference between the Mochin being in their place and their extension through engagement in Mitzvot, for here it relates to the engagement in the 613 Mitzvot to extend complete Mochin to ZON, GAR and VAK. Through engagement in 248 positive Mitzvot, the love of Hesed is extended from the right line, the quality of Abraham, which has merit since no Dinim grip them. This is why we can extend them even before we are completed with the 365 negative Mitzvot.
In relation to the presence of these Mochin de Hassadim in Bina, although the Hassadim are in GAR de Bina, when they are extended down to the souls of the righteous, whose wholeness depends entirely on the illumination of Hochma, these Mochin de Hassadim are still considered for them as only VAK, Vav-Hey de HaVaYaH, without a Rosh, for the Yod-Hey de HaVaYaH is missing in them.
However, through engagement in great care in the 365 negative Mitzvot, we extend illumination of Hochma from the left line, the fear of Isaac, which extends from the point of Shuruk that is drawn to GAR, to Yod-Hey de HaVaYaH. These Mochin are Tefillin called Oz , and it is written on them, “A tower of strength is the name of the Lord,” as well as “And all the peoples of the earth shall see that the name of the Lord is called upon you, and they will fear you.”
Thus, now the Mochin have been completed for the souls in illumination of Hochma, GAR. For this reason, the souls could not receive these Mochin as long as they are on the right and on the left because the lower ones receive only from the middle line, Tifferet, Jacob, when he has only Mochin de VAK. He is Israel when he obtains the GAR, as well, and then the Mochin extend from him to the souls of the righteous. It is written only about Jacob, “And behold, the Lord stood over him,” and not over Abraham or Isaac.
The meaning of the name HaVaYaH filled with Alephs is that Israel came up in the thought to be created, where “thought” has the letters Het-Shin-Bet Mem-Hey , adding up to 45, HaVaYaH filled with Alephs, and the holy name is in it. Bina is called “thought,” and it was said about her that Israel, ZA in Mochin de Gadlut, came up in the thought, Bina, to be created, to receive his Mochin. Bina is called “thought” as she is the letters Hashav  Mem-Hey, implying the count HaVaYaH filled with Alephs, which is 45 in Gematria. The filling of Alephs implies the corrections that were corrected for ZON in Tzimtzum Bet by which ZA could rise to Bina to receive her Mochin. Without them, he would not be able to rise up there. This is why Bina received the name, “thought.”
Because of Jacob, Israel in Gadlut, it is written, “And God created the man in His own image,” since once ZA received the Mochin de Gadlut in the name Israel, called Tzelem , it was said about him, “created,” for being the middle line, the Mochin to the souls of the lower ones flow from him because they cannot receive from the edges—right and left, Abraham and Isaac.
198) Sons, life, and nourishments are drawn to the lower ones only from the middle pillar, called “My son, My firstborn, Israel.” He is also called “the tree of life,” and in Daniel, he is called “A tree in which there is food for all.” For Divinity, who is only in the lower ones, Israel below are considered her life, Divinity’s, and the Torah is considered her nourishments. The prayer, regarded as the offering that brings Divinity to a Zivug with ZA, it is said about her in exile that she says to ZA her husband, “Give me sons.”
He explains the matter of sons, life, and nourishments. The middle pillar, Israel, bestows upon Divinity for the lower ones. The bestowals of life to Divinity are the lower children of Israel, who draw their lives from Divinity, and the giving of the secrets of Torah for the lower ones is considered the nourishments of Divinity. The prayer, which is her Zivug with ZA, extends sons, who are souls, for the lower ones. It is written about her, “And she said to Jacob, ‘Give me sons.’”
199) Divinity is an offering of the Creator when he receives for her on the right, on the left, and in the body. His unification with her is through the righteous Yesod, called “a token,” and it is the token of Tefillin, the token of Sabbath and good day. The two Zivugim of ZA with Divinity are for sons, life, and nourishments: 1) To impart life and nourishments through right, left, and body, which is through the three lines HGT. 2) For begetting sons, the souls of the lower ones, which is only in his unification with her through righteous Yesod, called “token.”
The first Zivug indicates that ZA is lacking new NHY de Gadlut, for which it is considered a Zivug from HGT. At that time he can give to the souls only life and nourishments. The second Zivug is when he attains new NHY de Gadlut. At that time the Zivug is through NHY, who are primarily Yesod, and he is fit for begetting sons, meaning bestowing of souls.
When the prayer, Divinity, rises to ZA, she must be included with him in all ten Sefirot, since there is no Kedusha in less than ten, which is his Kedusha, his blessing, and his unification. This is so because there are three Zivugim to the Nukva with ZA: 1) Zivug NHY, which is called “unification,” 2) Zivug HGT, which is called “blessing,” and 3) Zivug HBD, which is called Kedusha.
When she unites with him in these three Zivugim, she receives from all ten Sefirot, HBD HGT NHY de ZA, and this is why we pray to the Creator in several degrees and several Sefirot, for we need to unite Divinity in three kinds of Zivugim so she receives from each of the ten Sefirot de ZA.
When a person wishes to raise up the prayer, he must raise her in order to unite her in three Zivugim, in all the movements, in Taamim and in Nekudot, since the letters are horses and the Nekudot  are horsemen riding them, and the Taamim are the arms of war. If the serpent wishes to slander the prayer, we must throw the sling-stone against him. The meaning of the Taamim Zarka, Makaf  Shofar, going Segolta, as is said below in the words of Rabbi Shimon.
The Sling-Stone
200) Rabbi Shimon started and said, “Listen, O upper ones, and gather, O lower ones, dwellers of the seminary of above and of below. Elijah, I adjure you, take permission from the Creator and come down here, for a great war has come to you. Hanoch, Matat, come down here, you and all the dwellers of the seminary under you, for it is not for my own glory that I did this, but for the glory of Divinity.”
Commentary: Those righteous ones, the authors of The Zohar, and especially Rabbi Shimon, their thoughts and words were in actual deeds, for according to the quality of the innovations in the Torah that they discovered, the upper degrees were promptly set up and arranged after them in actual fact. That is, the righteous build worlds with their innovations in the Torah, and Rabbi Shimon prepared himself here to fight with the primordial serpent and subdue him through the unification of the sling-stone, and to open a door for the people of the world, so they too would know how to subdue the serpent.
It is known that one cannot correct in a place where he is not present. Thus, Rabbi Shimon had to be at that time in the place where the serpent was so he would be able to subdue him. To be certain that he would not be at risk in that lowly place, he asked for assistance from Elijah, Matat, and from the dwellers of the seminary of above and of below.
201) Rabbi Shimon started with the Taam  that is called Zarka. He said that we must raise the prayer to that certain place, like the sling-stone that is slung toward a specific target, and one is careful not to miss the target. Likewise, during the prayer one should aim one’s thought to Keter, who is an included and crowned stone. Keter is translated as inclusive. Also, Atara is Keter . By that he implies the two ascents of Nukva de ZA, who is called “a stone”: 1) an ascent to an equal level up to Keter de ZA. In that regard he calls it “an included stone.” 2) An ascent to Ein Sof, by which she takes the quality of a crown at the head of a righteous and becomes fit to receive the Mochin of PBP. In that regard, he refers to it as a crowned stone.
One should aim in those two intentions that are implied in the Taam Zarka. One should raise one’s thought and aim in the prayer, in Keter, which is an included and crowned stone. It was said about her, the Nukva, “All who make upright, make upright by a name,” meaning that the Nukva must be raised to the place from which she was taken.
In the beginning the Nukva was with ZA on an equal level and her level was through Keter de ZA, and both were using the same Keter, as it is written, “And God made the two great lights.” This is a state of two Partzufim. Afterwards the moon, Nukva, diminished because of her complaint, “Two kings do not use the same crown ,” and then she returned to being a point under Yesod de ZA, and rose to AVI for an Ibur. AVI rebuilt her in Ibur, Yenika, Mochin, de Panim, as it is written, “And He took one of his ribs, and the Lord God built the rib which He took from the man.”
The Nukva should be raised to the place from which she was taken because after the diminution of the moon we must correct her through prayer. The first correction is to raise her once again to an equal level with ZA so they will both be using the same Keter, as she was before AVI took her during the diminution of the moon, as it is written, “And He took one of his ribs,” which made her subsidiary to ZA.
Each day, in the intention of the prayer, one should extend Mochin and rebuild the Nukva de ZA, who each day returns to being a virgin whom no man has known. The order of the construction is that she should be extended two kinds of Mochin—Ibur Yenika Mochin de Achor , and Ibur Yenika Mochin de Panim . First, three kinds of Ibur Yenika Mochin in Achoraim de ZA should be extended to her: 1) Ibur, Mochin de NHY, 2) Yenika, Mochin de HGT, 3) Mochin, meaning Mochin de GAR on an equal level through Keter de ZA.
Afterwards the three Behinot Ibur Yenika Mochin de Panim should be extended to her, which come to her through the construction of AVI. This is why it was said that the Nukva must be raised to the place from which she was taken, meaning to extend to her the Ibur Yenika Mochin de Achoraim de ZA, when her level grew up to Keter, as she was before AVI took her from there. It was said about her, “All who make upright, make upright by a name,” meaning that Malchut does not have an upright level, equal with ZA, unless in the Mochin of the Achoraim de ZA before she was diminished. Afterwards he extends to her Ibur Yenika Mochin de Panim through a prayer.
202) In that place, when he raises her to her husband, on an equal level to the Keter of her husband, he will not stop even if a serpent were wrapped around his heel. Although it was said of him, “And you will bruise his heel,” still that stone implied in the letter Yod of Yaakov —for Jacob has the letters Yod-Akev , of which it was said, “From there the stone of Israel shepherds”—he will not stop raising her to the place from which she was taken by his power.
Although the serpent has a grip in the Nukva, as it is written, “And you will bruise his heel,” which the Creator said to the serpent, and as it is written, “With which they have reproached the footsteps of Your Messiah, Lord.” It is also written, “The iniquity of my heels,” with the letters Akev -Yod. However, Jacob the patriarch corrected it, raising it to his head, as it is written, “And he took of the stones of the place,” meaning the Yod, who was at the end of the heel, “And placed it under his head,” from the head of Akev to Bina, who is the head of Tifferet, called Jacob, since Jacob has the letters Yod-Akev. By that she was mitigated up to Behina Nukva to Israel, which has the letters Li Rosh , and it was said about her, “From there the stone of Israel shepherds.” Through that ascent he became certain that he will not stop because of the grip of the serpent and will be able to raise her to the place from which she was taken, to Keter de ZA.
Once he returned her to the level of Keter ZA, the middle pillar, he must raise her from the middle pillar through Ein Sof. When he lowers her from Ein Sof, it is said of the Nukva, “All who kneel, kneel in ‘Blessed.’” Once he aims in his prayer to extend to the Nukva Ibur-Yenika-Mochin de Achoraim and her level was equaled to that of Keter ZA, he must aim to raise her to Ibur once more, and to extend to her Ibur-Yenika-Mochin de Panim, to raise her up to Ein Sof. Then she is built by AVI, as it is written, “And the Lord God built the rib and brought her to the man,” ZA.
When he lowers her from Ein Sof and she returns to ZA, as it is written, “And  brought her to the man,” it is said of the Nukva, “All who kneel, kneel in ‘Blessed,’” meaning that her level was diminished by a new construction from Ein Sof. It is so because kneeling indicates bowing of the head and smallness of level, for now the Nukva became annulled before ZA and has nothing of her own except what her husband gives her. But in the beginning, when she was in Mochin de Achoraim, although she did not need ZA and was as big as him, she still could not be in that state due to a lack of blessing, the light of Hassadim, for this is the meaning of her complaint.
But now, after the new construction from Ein Sof, “And the Lord God built the rib,” although her level was diminished in kneeling, she was blessed with the level of Hassadim in which the light of Hochma clothed, as well. This is the intimation, “All who kneel,” that the whole matter of the kneeling of the Nukva is because he kneels in “blessed,” where by the kneeling, she obtained the blessing from the upper blessing. By that she received the Mochin de PBP and became fit for a Zivug with ZA PBP.
This is why it was said that she should be raised through Ein Sof and through endlessness, and will not part her from ZA, neither above nor below. By extending Ibur-Yenika-Mochin de Achor, the Nukva unites with ZA below, and by extending Ibur-Yenika-Mochin de Panim, she unites with him above.
203) Sometimes he is her husband, the letter Vav, implying the righteous Yesod that includes six joints of the two thighs, NH, and then the Nukva descends to him for a Zivug in the two thighs NH, for there are three joints RTS in the Sefira Netzah, the right thigh, and three joints RTS in the Sefira Hod. The righteous Yesod decides about them in the middle and includes both of them. It is called Vav after the six joints in them.
Here The Zohar explains the order of Ibur-Yenika-Mochin de Achor that should be extended, for she gradually grows. The first Zivug is called “the level of NHY,” Ibur. Sometimes he is her husband, the letter Vav, implying Tifferet, who includes six joints of the two arms, RTS de Hesed, and RTS de Gevura. At that time the Nukva grows and ascends in the two arms at the level of Yenika. Sometimes ZA is her husband when he stands between AVI. At that time he is called “the son of Yod-Hey” and the Nukva must be raised there for a Zivug in him, to the level of Mochin that she obtains from ZA. At that time she grows and rises up to his Rosh.
Sometimes he is her husband at the level of Keter, in the shape of Aleph, which is Vav between two letters Yod, Yod above and Yod below . Aleph includes ten Sefirot: KH above, Bina and TM below. The Nukva must be raised to him and she grows with him on a completely equal level through Keter. This is the whole of the growth of the Nukva. However, she obtains this level only in the state of Achoraim. When the Nukva ascends and grows up to Keter, it is written about her, “The stone which the builders loathed has become the cornerstone,” since she obtained the level of Keter, considered the cornerstone. This explains the order of Ibur-Yenika-Mochin de Achoraim.
204) When she rises to the Rosh of all the Roshim , to RADLA, Ein Sof, the angels ask about her, “Where is the place of His glory, to admire Him?” That is, her ascent from the middle pillar to Ein Sof to receive Ibur-Yenika-Mochin de PBP, as it is written, “And the Lord God built the rib.”
This explains the two kinds of Ibur-Yenika-Mochin that must be extended for the Nukva during prayer—Ibur-Yenika-Mochin de Achor and Ibur-Yenika-Mochin de Panim. And when the Nukva ascends to ZA, when she is in the form of the letter Aleph, she becomes a Keter there in the Rosh of the Aleph. When she descends from there, she descends in Aleph and becomes a point below the Vav in the Aleph, for the Aleph includes ten Sefirot: Vav in the middle, the Parsa, the upper Yod, KH, the bottom Yod, Bina and ZON from Chazeh de ZA and below, NHY.
When she rises to the Aleph though Mochin de Achoraim, she is Keter at the Rosh of the Aleph because she ascends through the upper Yod where there is Keter de ZA. When she descends, it is done through Ibur-Yenika-Mochin de Panim. And when she is diminished, she descends below Chazeh de ZA and can no longer rise above Parsa de ZA and equalize with him through Keter. This is considered that she descends below the Vav, the Parsa, and becomes the bottom Yod, and all that she receives is through ZA, her husband. When the Nukva ascends, she is called “Keter in Taamim.” When she descends, she is called “a point.” When she unites with ZA, she is Vav Shuruk .
The Zohar implies how the Nukva ascends and descends and unifies similar to the shape of Aleph. First, she unites with him in Shuruk, , receiving from him the left line, Ibur-Yenika-Mochin de Achoraim. It is so because for herself, the Nukva is built only from the left of ZA. At that time she grows and ascends up to the level of Keter over ZA and receives there from the Taamim de ZA.
Afterwards she receives Ibur-Yenika-Mochin de Panim from Ein Sof through the construction of AVI and descends to Nekudot de ZA. At that time she descends below the Vav in the Aleph, for then she becomes the bottom Hochma because Taamim is Keter, Nekudot is Hochma. When she unites with him in Shuruk, , she becomes Vav in the Aleph, and when she rises up to Keter she is considered the upper Yod. When she descends she is regarded as the bottom Yod. He calls Mochin de Achoraim Taamim, and he calls Mochin de Panim Nekudot, since Taamim is called “movement,” on the part of the point of unification.
When she is Keter over the Rosh de ZA, she is called “the letter Zayin,” where the form of Vav is ZA, and the Nukva is Keter on the head of the Zayin . The token of the covenant, Yesod de ZA, consists of that letter Zayin, for she is the seventh of all. Yesod de ZA has a crown on his head, like the letter Zayin, a crown on the head of the righteous, from his Hitkalelut  with the Nukva from the time when she rose to the Rosh of the Aleph to be the level of Keter de ZA. In that regard of the Zayin, Malchut is called “seventh,” on the Sabbath day. She is also the seventh quality of ZAT, seventh to everything, both above the Chazeh, Keter for ZA, as it is written, “A virtuous woman is the crown of her husband,” as well as below the Chazeh, as Ateret Yesod.
205) That stone, the Malchut—Nukva—is the construction of all the worlds. It was said about it, “A perfect and just stone shall be unto you.” It is a measure between each and every Sefira, and every Sefira rises with it to be ten Sefirot. Its measure is Vav.
Light does not extend from Ein Sof unless by Zivug de Hakaa from the upper light on the Masach in the Kli of Malchut. For this reason, the Nukva is regarded as the construction of all the worlds, for without the Masach that was established in her, all the worlds would be in Tohu ve Bohu . She is the Sium  of every illumination because once the illumination expands in ten Sefirot from above downward through her Behina, which is restricted from receiving light, she stops the illumination and ends. Thus, Malchut becomes a measure between each and every Sefira, ending the illumination of each Sefira and thus separating between each and every Sefira. Also, she is the tenth Sefira in each Sefira.
The measure that Malchut measures in each Sefira through Zivug de Hakaa on the five Behinot of her Masach is Vav. She extends light as the measure of Vav de HaVaYaH ZA. The measure relates to the actual light that is measured. A measure is only a boundary.
Through Malchut each cubit becomes ten cubits of length between each and every Sefira, as it is written, “Ten cubits shall be the length of a board,” and between everything she makes 100 Sefirot, ten between each two Sefirot. Ten times ten is 100, since there is no degree without ten Sefirot, which are included in one another. Thus, each degree contains 100 Sefirot, and each Sefira is separated from the other by Malchut’s force of Sium. Thus, there are necessarily 100 Malchuts in each degree. When you invert the letters of Me’ah  they become the letters of Amah . This indicates that all of these 100 boundaries are from only one cubit, Malchut.
206) Each and every measure that Malchut measures is called “a world,” meaning a degree in itself, and each is Yod Vav, indicating the extent and measure. Vav is the weight of the light. Yod is the measure of the light. Vav implies the actual light being weighed, or which is measured by the Masach in Malchut. Yod implies only the boundary of the light, not itself. The extent of the measure is five cubits to the length and five cubits to the width, corresponding to the measure of each firmament, whose span is 500 parasangs to the length and 500 parasangs to the width.
That is, the Sefirot are included in one another, hence when ten Sefirot KHB TM come out of the Zivug de Hakaa, they are included in one another and expand five times KHB TM side by side, becoming five Behinot to the length, KHB TM from above downward, and five Behinot to the width, five times KHB TM that are added to the width, side by side. Thus, they are five to the length and five to the width.
They correspond to the firmament, in which there are also 500 parasangs to its length and 500 parasangs to its width for the same reason, since on the part of Bina, each Behina is regarded as 100, and five Behinot are 500, included in one another. Hence, there are 500 parasangs in it to its length, as well as to its width, and they are two letters Hey in the name HaVaYaH—the first Hey implying the width, and the bottom Hey implying the length.
207) The level of Partzuf ZA is explained in the letters HaVaYaH. Vav de HaVaYaH indicates Tifferet, heaven, Tifferet de ZA. His five firmaments are the bottom Hey de HaVaYaH, which are called “heaven,” meaning the additional Hey that indicates those five firmaments included in ZA, who is called “heaven.” The five upper firmaments are called “heaven’s heaven,” meaning there are five firmaments above Chazeh de ZA, and five firmaments below his Chazeh, which are the letters Hey in the name HaVaYaH. The first Hey implies the five upper firmaments, and the bottom Hey implies the five lower firmaments.
Vav de HaVaYaH, Tifferet, which includes five firmaments, is itself considered a sixth firmament to them, sixth to the five firmaments above the Chazeh, sixth to the five firmaments below the Chazeh. However, above the Chazeh he is called Tifferet, and below the Chazeh he is called Yesod.
Yod de HaVaYaH is Malchut who becomes a seventh firmament for them, a Keter  over the Rosh  of Vav. The letter Zayin that rose in a Keter on its head and became a Yod over the Vav, which is the seventh firmament both for the firmaments above Chazeh de ZA and for the firmaments below his Chazeh. However, above it is Keter on his head, Yod de HaVaYaH in the level of ZA, and below it is a crown on the head of the righteous. They are seven in seven—seven firmaments above Chazeh de ZA, and seven firmaments below his Chazeh, making 14 firmaments on his level.
This is the level of Partzuf ZA in the four letters HaVaYaH. His five Sefirot HGT NH are five firmaments, and being divided at the Chazeh into two Partzufim, he has two times five firmaments. The five firmaments above the Chazeh are the first Hey de HaVaYaH, and ZA himself—who includes them—is the sixth firmament, Vav de HaVaYaH. Malchut—who rose and became a crown over his head, as it is written, “A virtuous woman is the crown of her husband”—is Yod de HaVaYaH, the seventh firmament above the Chazeh.
The five firmaments below the Chazeh are the bottom Hey de HaVaYaH. Yesod, who includes them, is the second Vav, implied in the filling Vav-Vav. He is a sixth firmament below the Chazeh. That same Malchut above the Chazeh, the seventh firmament, Yod de HaVaYaH, becomes a seventh firmament here, as well, Ateret Yesod, a crown on the head of a righteous. Yod at the Rosh of everything and Yod at the Sof of everything, which are two letters Yod in the combination of the name YAHDONHY—seven firmaments above and seven firmaments below, where each one that is below receives from its corresponding Behina above.
So are the countries. There are seven countries over seven countries overlapping like onion skins that circle each other on all sides. ZA and his Nukva are called “heaven and earth.” As the level of the heaven, who is ZA—seven firmaments over seven firmaments—so is the level of Partzuf Nukva, called “earth.” She has seven countries corresponding to the seven firmaments of ZA, and for the same reason explained in ZA, they are above her Chazeh and they are below her Chazeh. The seven above the Chazeh receive from the seven firmaments of ZA above the Chazeh, and the seven below the Chazeh receive from the seven firmaments below Chazeh de ZA.
All the firmaments, the seven above the Chazeh and the seven below the Chazeh are implied in the two eyes, since the three colors in the eye—white, red, and green—are three Sefirot HGT. The white color is Hesed, red color is red tendons in her, Gevura, and green color is Tifferet. The two eyelids are NH, the upper one is Netzah and the lower one is Hod. The eye itself, which includes them, is Yesod. The black point in the middle of the eye is Malchut, thus seven Sefirot HGT NHYM in the eye. The seven on the right eye are the seven above the Chazeh, and the seven on the left eye are the seven below the Chazeh.
208) Hey de HaVaYaH, Malchut, who rose to Keter over the Rosh of ZA, is considered a small world. Vav de HaVaYaH, Tifferet, is considered a long world. Anyone who wishes to ask his wishes for the long world should prolong his prayer, and anyone who prays to the short world should make his prayer short. It is as we learn that in a place where it is said to be brief, meaning in the Yod, he is not permitted to prolong. To be brief in the prayer means like Moses, who prayed a short prayer, “Please God, please heal her,” for his prayer was at the point of Yod de HaVaYaH, who is a short world.
The Yod de HaVaYaH is Malchut who rose to Keter on his Rosh. She is built entirely from the left line of ZA, the point of Shuruk. The light of Hochma in that Yod cannot illuminate in her due to lack of clothing in Hassadim. Therefore, that Yod is considered a short world, since the light of Hochma in her is too short to spread below. Vav de HaVaYaH, Tifferet, is the line that decides between the two lines—right and left—and clothes them in one another, sustaining the illumination of both. The right line illuminates from above downward, and the left line from below upward. Hence, Vav is considered a long world because his illumination spreads to the lower ones. This is the intimation that the Yod is short-legged and the Vav has a long leg.
He brings evidence to the matter from Moses’ two prayers—one prayer was very short, “Please God, please heal her,” and the other was very long, lasting 40 days and 40 nights. This is why Moses was so brief in his prayer, since his prayer was at the point of Yod, the Malchut in Keter over his Rosh, the left prior to the sentencing of the Vav. Hence, Moses was brief in his prayer because Hochma does not spread in Yod before she is included in Vav de HaVaYaH, and he prolonged only in the letter Vav de HaVaYaH.
209) In a place where it is said to prolong he is not permitted to be brief. This is from the side of the letter Vav. Moses’ fall was in the letter Peh, meaning Mem  days and Mem nights, which together are Peh . Everything is the two letters Peh Vav in the word “VaEtnapel  before the Lord as on the first, forty days and forty nights.” It is all Mem, two letters Mem, one is open and the other closed, and the point of Yod extended through their middle, creating the combination Mayim .
Once The Zohar explained the extension of the Mochin of Nukva in Achoraim and Panim in general, it explains the three lines of Nukva in four Behinot : Taamim, Nekudot, Otiot , and time. First, it explains them with respect to the Otiot. It says that the meaning of Peh Vav of “And I fell down,” and the Yod in the middle of the two letters Mem in the word “water.”
When the Nukva is in her Katnut, without Mochin, she is built in the letter Bet, where her north side is broken open implying that she lacks the Mochin of the north side, which is Bina. When ZA begins to build her, he first extends to her the Mochin of his left line, the Mochin from the point of Shuruk. Then it is considered that the Vav extends from the left line of ZA to the Nukva, who is in the shape of Bet, and fences her north side.
Now she is considered the shape of the Mem that is closed from all directions. The Bet of Beresheet is a point in his palace, Nukva de ZA. It was said about her, “A locked garden is my sister, bride, a locked spring, a fountain sealed up.” She is sealed in the letter Vav because when the Vav extends to the Nukva, the letter Bet, what is found is that her previously being Bet, she has now become a closed Mem, which is a wine kept in its grapes.
This means that the extension of the Mochin of the left line of ZA is considered the letter Vav, which fences the breach of the north side of the Bet, and becomes a closed Mem, since those Mochin extend from the point of Shuruk, which is a hidden light before it receives the illuminating garment of glory. This is why the Nukva is blocked and can no longer illuminate to the lower ones. However, because there is no absence in the spiritual, it is considered that the previous form of the Nukva, the letter Bet, remains now, as well, once she has become a closed Mem, and becomes the right line in her, as though the Hassadim are extended from the right line of ZA. But because of the Mochin of the left, which are in the form of closed Mem , the Bet on the right receives the form of the Mem, but not a blocked, but only an open Mem .
Thus, now she has two lines: the right line is a Mem that is open in Hassadim, and the left line is a closed Mem that does not illuminate. The right line is an open Mem, forty days, and the left line is a closed Mem, forty nights. As long as the lines do not unite with one another, both are still regarded as lacking wholeness, which is called “falling.” Therefore, when Moses extended those two lines—right and left—to the Nukva, he said about them, “And I fell down before the Lord as in the first, forty days and forty nights.” And because they lack perfection, he said about them, “And I fell down,” implying falling.
Falling is in the letter Peh, in the two letters Mem—the open and the closed—which are Peh (80) in Gematria, in whom there is falling. It is so because everything is a matter of Peh Vav that Moses talked about in the words, “And I fell down.” Thus, the two lines—Vav of the left line of ZA, who makes the two letters Mem, Mem  days and Mem  nights, which are Peh—are still considered falling because they lack the unification of right and left.   Yod , a point in the middle, became water. Therefore, we must extend the point of Yod between the two letters Mem. This is the middle line extended over the Masach of the point of Hirik.
This creates the combination “water,” indicating light of Hassadim, which opens Mochin so they may illuminate to the lower ones from above downward. On the part of Hesed, so the lights of Hassadim may open in the Nukva, we should prolong the prayer forty days and forty nights, and then extend Yod in their middle. Then the Hassadim in the right line of Nukva illuminate and appear. This explains the three lines of Nukva in the letters: the open Mem being the right line, the closed Mem is the left line, and the letter Yod between them is the middle line.
210) In the holy name, HaVaYaH ascends on the fourth playing  of the Taamim. We should prolong in playing this movement in the Revii  over the name HaVaYaH in the blowing. The place to be brief is on the side of Gevura, in the movement of Shevarim , where there is the playing of Tvir in the Taamim. Medium means that they neither prolong nor are they being brief. This is the Trua , the middle pillar, the middle line, the playing of Shalshelet  in the Taamim.
It explains the three lines of Nukva, how they are implied in the Taamim. The Revii  in the Taamim is the right line, light of Hassadim. For this reason, we must prolong with the name HaVaYaH punctuated with this Taam . In the blowing of the Shofar, it is the Tekyia , which implies right, Hassadim, since the light of Hassadim is the place where one needs to prolong. The Tvir in the Taamim is the left line, Gevura. Hence, we must be brief in her. In the blowing of the Shofar it is the Shevarim , implying Gevura.
The Shalshelet  in the Taamim is the middle line, which decides and unites the two lines—right and left, short and long—with one another, thus becoming medium, including both. For this reason it is neither long nor short, and it is the middle pillar, the middle line. In the blowing of the Shofar it is the Trua , implying the middle line, the playing of Shalshelet in the Taamim. This is why the middle line is called Shalshelet , as it is like a chain to both of them, to the right line and to the left line, for it ties them and unites them in the shekel of the sanctuary.
211) Corresponding to the Revii  in the Taamim, which ascends in its tune, there is the point of Holam in the Nekudot , Hesed. The Shevarim  are Tvir in the Taamim, corresponding to the point of Shva in the punctuation. On Revii one should raise one’s pitch, and on Tvir one should lower the pitch, as it is Gevura. In Aramaic and in the holy tongue, Tvir means Shevarim. Because the pitch needs to be lowered, it is regarded as a broken voice, which is called Shevarim or Tvir.
The trumpeting  is the middle line, called Shalshelet, Yod, extending between the two letters Mem of forty days and forty nights. It is Segolta in the Taamim, where through the middle line, Trua, and Shalshelet and Yod, the right line appears in full, which is called Segolta in the Taamim.
213) Zarka, Makaf  Shofar, going Segolta. Zarka means that the Nukva is thrown  to that place from which she was taken, which is Ibur-Yenika-Mochin de Achoraim before AVI built her. Makaf  Shofar is an extension of Ibur-Yenika-Mochin de Panim by raising her to Ima, who is called Shofar. Makaf means conjunction . Shofar is Ima. Going Segolta is disclosure of light of Hassadim on the right line of Nukva, since the Mochin de Panim go and disclose the Segolta de Taamim in all its wholeness. That Zivug of going Segolta is done in secret, for in the lower Divinity it is said, “And her voice will not be heard.”
The point of right is Holam, the line of Hesed, the Lord is king. The point of left is Shuruk, Shva, the line of Gevura, the Lord was king. The middle point is Hirik, the deciding line, the Lord will be king.
He explains the three lines in past, future, and present tenses:
The right is the Lord is king, with Segol, present, since the illumination of the right is the place in which it was said to prolong, to extend it down to this world. This is why it is implied with a king punctuated with Segol , present, since the corporeal ones do not touch the past or the future, but only the present moment.
The left—of which it was said to be brief because its illumination is hidden and does not reach down to this world—is implied in “Was king” , punctuated with Kamatz. This means that He was king in the past, and the lower ones cannot touch the past, hence they must be brief.
The middle point, the deciding line—will be king in the future—is medium, and it is guaranteed to reach this world at the end of correction.
The Revii  in Taamim is to raise the pitch.
The Tvir  in Taamim is to lower the pitch.
The Shalshelet  in Taamim grips the two lines like a chain and unites them with one another, and then extends their illumination down like the Revii in the Taamim, with which the melody is prolonged in the word. It is a single point, like the Holam. The Shalshelet, which unites the two lines with one another, extends the illumination of the Revii of Taamim from above downward to this world, meaning the disclosure of illumination of Hassadim on the right lines.
There is no point in Nekudot  that does not have its corresponding one in the Taamim. Opposite Segol in the Nekudot is the Segolta in the Taamim. Opposite Shva is Big Zakef in Taamim. In all of them you will find Nekudot corresponding to the Taamim, to anyone who knows the hidden secrets. By that he is telling us that there are different relations in comparing Nekudot to Taamim, for which one cannot compare them unless he knows the hidden secrets.
Creates Worlds and Destroys Them
214) “These are the generations of the heaven and the earth.” Where it is written, “These,” it disqualifies those before it. The “These” here disqualifies “These are the generations of Tohu , from Malchut de Midat ha Din, who is called Tohu, implied in the verse, “And the land was Tohu.” We learn about “These are the generations of Tohu” that the Creator creates worlds and destroys them. This is why it is written that the land was Tohu ve Bohu ,” that it was Tohu for He destroyed them. But the generations of ELEH , who is Malchut that is mitigated in Midat ha Rachamim remained.
215) Why did the Creator create worlds to begin with, to destroy them? Would it not be better to not create them? Indeed there is an issue here. What does “And destroys them” mean? After all, the Creator does not destroy His own works. Moreover, it is written of these heaven, “For the heavens shall vanish away like smoke.” Thus, it means that the Creator does and then obliterates what He has done. This is possible in regard to people, not in regard to the Creator.
216) Rather, so is the matter: The Creator created the world and created it with the Torah. Beresheet is the Torah, of which it is written, “The Lord made me as the beginning of His way.” Thus, the Torah calls herself “beginning,” and with that beginning, the Torah, He created the heaven and the earth, meaning the upper heaven and earth, upper VAK in Bina, implied in Beresheet, Barah Sheet .
He supported them with the Torah, for a covenant is written in Beresheet, since Beresheet has the letters of Berit Esh . It is written about her, “If My covenant is not day and night, I have not placed the ordinances of heaven and earth.” Thus, the heaven and earth lean on the Torah, since heaven and earth depend on keeping the covenant in Beresheet, which is the Torah.
It is written about these heavens that were created and stand over the Torah, “The heavens are heavens for the Lord.” And the earth that was created and stands on the Torah is called “the land of the living.” It consists of seven lands, of which King David said, “I shall walk before the Lord in the lands of the living.” They are called “the lands of the living” to indicate that they are from Bina, who is called “living God,” since these heaven and earth are from Bina.
217) Following them, He created the heaven and earth on Tohu, in which there is no Yesod, which is a covenant, on which to lean them, meaning lower heaven and earth, which are ZON. Before Malchut was mitigated in Bina, Nukva was in the form of Tohu. It is written about her, “And the land was Tohu .” This is why the Creator wished to give the Torah to the nations of the world, which is actual circumcision, whereby the correction of circumcision they would mitigate the Malchut with Bina, and then the Mochin, which are called Torah, would be revealed to them. But the nations did not wish to receive her and the land remained desolate and dry.
218) It is written, “Let the water under the heavens gather unto one place.” “Let the water ... gather” is the Torah, who is called “water.” “Unto one place” means Israel, since the souls of Israel extend from that place of which it was said, “Blessed be the glory of the Lord from His place.” “The glory of the Lord” means lower Divinity, Malchut. “From His place” means the upper Divinity, Bina. Thus, Bina is called “a place.” And because their souls are from Bina, who is called “a place,” the name HaVaYaH is certainly on them.
It is written about them, “For the portion of the Lord is His people.” It is also written, “Let the water under the heaven gather unto one place,” where water means Torah, and “One place” means Israel, the recipients of the Torah, excluding the nations of the world, who did not wish to receive the Torah, hence the land remained desolate and dry.
219) The Torah is the settling of the world because it was created and is sustained in her. The nations of the world, who did not receive her, remain desolate and dry. This is the meaning of the Creator creating worlds and destroying them. The world was ruined because of those who did not keep the Mitzvot of the Torah, who did not raise the Malchut to mitigate her in Midat ha Rachamim of Bina. It is not that the Creator obliterates and destroys His own work, the heaven and earth and everything in them, as people think in the explanation of the words, that the Creator creates worlds and destroys them. Why should the Creator obliterate His own children, Israel, of whom it was said, Behibaram , indicating be Hey Beraam , the Malchut that is corrected with Midat ha Rachamim, Bina? And because they are corrected in Bina, they are as the Creator wishes, so why should He obliterate them?
220) Because of those among the nations of the world who converted, the small Hey of Abraham falls in the fifth millennium, which is Hey . The fifth millennium is desolate and dry, as it is written, “And the river shall be desolate and dry.” “Desolate” means the ruin of the first Temple, and “Dry” means the ruin of the second Temple.
Malchut that is mitigated in Midat ha Rachamim, Bina, is called “small Hey.” Her root is Malchut de AK, the ten Sefirot from Tabur de AK downward. These ten Sefirot were expanding through the point of this world, and then, to be mitigated in Midat ha Rachamim, Malchut de Malchut, the point of this world that ends, rose to the place of Bina de Malchut and concluded Partzuf Malchut de AK there, leaving in her only two Sefirot KH and half of Bina. A Parsa  was spread below them, and this Parsa ended the Atzilut. Thus, because of the mitigation of Malchut de AK in Bina, her ten Sefirot diminished into two and a half Sefirot, and she became a small Hey. This is why in every place she is, Malchut that is mitigated in Bina is called “small Hey.” She is the small Hey of Abraham, the Hey that the Creator added to his name, Abram.
This is all the difference between the souls of Israel and the nations of the world. The souls of Israel come from that small Hey because the souls of Israel extend from that place of which it is written, “Blessed be the glory of the Lord from His place.” But the nations of the world extend from Malchut de Midat ha Din, who was not mitigated in Midat ha Rachamim. This is why it was said that because of those who converted from among the nations of the world, the Hey of Abraham falls, since the proselytes, who originate from Malchut de Midat ha Din, drop Malchut from the place of Bina, the small Hey of Abraham, since they evoke Midat ha Din in her, for which reason the two temples were ruined. It is as we learn, “Proselytes are as hard for Israel as psoriasis.”
221) Moses wanted to admit them under the wings of Divinity, and thought that they, too, extended from the Malchut that was mitigated in Midat ha Rachamim, the small Hey, and extended to them the Mochin of the small Hey of Abraham. Because of it, the proselytes caused him a descent, as it is written, “Go, go down, for your people ... have corrupted themselves.” They caused Israel to sin with the calf, which is why the Creator told Moses, “Go, go down.” Because they did not receive the Mochin of the small Hey in the fear of the Yod of the name HaVaYaH, and with the love of the Hey of the name, Moses descended from his degree, which is Vav de HaVaYaH.
Moses is the queen’s husband, Vav de HaVaYaH. He elevated the Hey de HaVaYaH, which is the small Hey, to the place of Bina, the first Hey de HaVaYaH, and the Vav rose to the place of Hochma, Yod de HaVaYaH. Then he extended Mochin of Yod, fear, and Mochin of Hey, love, to the bottom Hey de HaVaYaH, who stands and clothes the first Hey de HaVaYaH. But since the proselytes originate from Malchut de Midat ha Din that is not mitigated in Bina, they could not receive the Mochin of the bottom Hey, as she was above in the place of Yod-Hey de HaVaYaH, in fear and love, she was extended below, Midat ha Din in her appeared, and all the lights departed her.
It is so because Malchut is fit to receive lights only if she clothes the place of Bina, the first Hey de HaVaYaH. And the words, “Go, go down,” were said to Moses, who is Vav, by the first Hey, Bina. During the sin, when they wished to extend the lights below, the letters Yod-Hey de HaVaYaH promptly parted, to stop the abundance from the bottom Hey. Then Bina, the first Hey, lowered her three letters ELEH and remained in VAK without a Rosh. This necessarily caused Moses, Vav de HaVaYaH, Tifferet, to also diminish into VAK without a Rosh, lowering his letters ELEH, since after the upper one is diminished, all the ones below it must be diminished with it.
222) The letter Vav de HaVaYaH descended with Moses in order to keep him, so he is not lost among them, for in regard to the incarnation, Moses was destined to mingle with the mixed multitude, whose souls are from the side of those of whom it is written, “For the heavens shall vanish away like smoke.” These are the ones for whom Noah did not ask for mercy. It is written about them, “And they shall be obliterated from the earth,” since they were from among those of whom it is written, “Obliterate the memory of Amalek.” Moses did not keep from them and dropped the small Hey among them. This is why he will not enter the land of Israel until he returns the Hey to her place, and this is why Moses descended from his degree, and the Vav de HaVaYaH descended with him.
This is why the Hey fell and the Vav will raise her, the Vav of Moses, since Moses’ degree is Vav de HaVaYaH, and by the sin of the calf, the letters ELEH de Bina descended. Because of them, the letters ELEH of Vav de HaVaYaH also descended to the bottom Hey and the letters ELEH of the bottom Hey descended to the Klipot. Hence, Moses was sentenced to not enter the land until the bottom Hey returns to her place, to Yod-Hey, as she was prior to the sin of the calf. This is why the Vav de HaVaYaH and Moses descended from their degree, so that the Vav would raise the Hey from her fall. Because the letters ELEH of Vav de HaVaYaH, ZA, descended and fell to the bottom Hey at the time of correction, ZA—the Vav—will return his letters ELEH to his degree, and the bottom Hey that is attached to them will return to the degree of Vav.
Likewise, Bina, the first Hey, will return her letters ELEH—which fell to the place of the Vav—to her degree. Then the Vav-Hey attached to them will rise along with them to Bina, to the first Hey. Thus, Vav-Hey will return to Yod-Hey, as prior to the sin. It follows that were it not for the descent of the letters ELEH of Vav to the place of the bottom Hey, the Vav would not be able to raise the bottom Hey. Because of the descent of Vav, the Vav can later raise the bottom Hey and return her to her place, to the first Hey, by returning his letters ELEH to their place.
223) For the small Hey, the Hey of Abraham, which is the Hey of BeHibaram , Moses was assisted by her. It is written about him, “Leading to the right of Moses, the arm of His glory.” He took her out from between the Klipot through the force of the Vav and brought her with him because by the Vav returning his letters ELEH with the Nukva attached to them to his degree, he was assisted by the Nukva and rose and clothed the Yod de HaVaYaH, bringing the Nukva up with him and clothing the first Hey de HaVaYaH.
Then the bottom Hey is immediately present over the name Yod-Hey as she is in the first Hey above with the Vav, and the oath is completed, as it is written, “The hand upon the throne of the Lord: the Lord will have war with Amalek from generation to generation.” Prior to it, the name is incomplete because it lacks the Vav-Hey and the throne is incomplete because it lacks the Aleph. But now the name is completed in Vav-Hey and the throne is completed with an Aleph.
What is, “From generation to generation”? It is Moses, of whom it is written, “A generation goes and a generation comes.” A generation is no less than 600,000, and this is Moses, of whom we learn that one woman in Egypt gave birth to 600,000 in a single belly.
“From generation to generation” is Moses, of whom it is written, “A generation goes and a generation comes,” meaning an expansion of Moses in each generation, going and coming in each and every generation. Because the measure of Moses’ soul is 600,000, since Moses was rewarded with Bina, Mochin de AVI that clothe VAK de AA, whose Sefirot are 10,000, since the Sefira Nukva is units, ZA is tens, YESHSUT is hundreds, AVI are thousands, and AA are 10,000. It follows that VAK, his HGT NHY, are 60,000, and when each of them consists of ten, they are 600,000.
This is why it was said, “One woman in Egypt gave birth to 600,000 in a single belly.” It refers to Moses because Moses is equal to 600,000. This necessarily means that there is no generation in which there is no illumination of Mochin of 600,000, meaning an expansion of Moses. It is written, “The Lord will have war with Amalek from generation to generation,” as for this reason, the Mochin of 600,000 are not permanent but reincarnate in each generation, which is because the Lord has war with Amalek.
Five Kinds of Mixed Multitude
224) There are five kinds of mixed multitude: Nephilim, Mighty, Anakim, Rephaim, and Amalekim. Because of them, the small Hey fell from her place, from Bina. It is written, “The Lord has made one opposite the other.” Thus, as there are five Behinot KHB TM in Kedusha, there are also their opposites in the Klipot. These are the five kinds of mixed multitude, whose acronym is Nega Ra  or Oneg Ra , since through the evil the pleasure is inverted into affliction, and the affliction is inverted into pleasure. Those five kinds of mixed multitude are mingled in Israel and make them sin, which is why the small Hey falls from her place, from her mitigation in Bina.
Balaam and Balak were from Amalek, for if you take the letter Ayin-Mem from the name Balaam, and the letters Lamed-Kof from the name Balak, you will be left with the letters Bet-Bet-Lamed , Bet-Lamed from Balaam and Bet from Balak. It follows that the two Klipot, Amalek and Babel, are implied in the names Balaam and Balak. He is telling us that Amalek is the Rosh of the Klipot and Keter, like the Klipa Babel, of which it is written in Daniel, “Its head was of fine gold,” for were not both of them equal, they would not be able to attach in one bonding in Balaam and Balak.
225) Those who remained in the flood of those of whom it is written, “And He blotted out every living thing,” and those who remained from the Klipa of Amalek in the fourth exile, the exile of Edom, are the heads in the world with great force. It is so because this Klipa is the Rosh and the Keter of the Klipot, and they become tools of destruction for Israel. It is written about them in regard to the flood, “For the earth is filled with violence.” These are the Amalekim, the first of the five kinds of mixed multitude, and they are Keter de Klipot.
226) It is written about the Nephilim of the mixed multitude, “And the sons of the God saw the daughters of the man, that they were good.” These are the second kind of mixed multitude, Hochma de Klipot, and they are from the Nephilim of above, who extend from Aza and Azael, who are angels of above whom the Creator dropped from heaven, which is why they are called Nephilim , and those Nephilim of the mixed multitude extend from them.
When the Creator wished to make the man, He said to the angels, “Let us make man in our image.” He wished to make him head of all the angels of above, appointed over all the angels, who would be subordinate to his command, as it is written about Joseph, “And let him appoint overseers over the land.”
227) For this reason, the angels wanted to slander him and said to the Creator, “What is man that You should remember him? After all, he is destined to sin before You, and why do You degrade us into being under him?” The Creator replied to them, “If you were below in the earth like man, you would sin more than him. Promptly, “And the sons of the God saw the daughters of the man that they were good,” and desired them, and the Creator dropped them down in shackles.
228) Those sons of the God are Aza and Azael, from whom the souls of the mixed multitude of the second kind extend. They are Nephilim because they dropped themselves from their Kedusha to fornicate after women that are good. And for this reason, the Creator dropped the mixed multitude from the next world, so they would have no portion there, and gave them their reward in this world, as it is written, “And repays those who hate Him to their faces, to destroy them,” to blot them out of the next world. This is the second kind of mixed multitude, the Nephilim, Hochma de Klipot.
229) The Mighty are the third kind of mixed multitude that mingled with Israel. It is written about them, “They were the mighty men who were of old, men of renown.” They are extended from the side of those of whom it is written, “Let us build us a city ... and let us make us a name,” meaning from the generation of Babylon.
That kind of mixed multitude build the synagogues and seminaries, and place among them a book of Torah with a crown on its head. It corresponds to the verse, “A city, and a tower with its top in heaven.” Building synagogues and seminaries corresponds to “A city,” and “Place a book of Torah there” corresponds to “A tower,” and “A crown on its head” corresponds to “With its top in heaven.” Yet, they do not intend for the sake of the Creator, but to do for themselves there, as it is written, “And let us make us a name.”
The sons of the Sitra Achra overcome Israel, who were blessed with being as the dust of the earth. They rob them, and the work is broken and ruined, meaning the synagogues and seminaries that they made. It is written about them, “And the waters prevailed exceedingly upon the earth.” The Klipot and the Sitra Achra, which are called “water,” destroyed the earth by their prevailing. This is the third kind of mixed multitude, which are the Mighty, and they are opposite Bina de Klipa.
230) The Rephaim are the fourth kind of mixed multitude that mingled with Israel. If they see a time of trouble for Israel, they leave them and part from them. And even if they have the power to save them they do not wish to save them, and they let go of the Torah and depart from her and from all those who engage in Torah, to favor idol worshippers. That is, they depart from the Torah and from Israel in favor of idol worshippers.
It is written about them, “The departed spirits  shall not rise.” That is, they will not rise for the revival of the dead. When visitation comes upon Israel and they are saved from their trouble, it is written about them, “And make all remembrance of them perish,” for since they are offspring of the dark, they are necessarily lost when the light comes to Israel. This is the fourth kind of mixed multitude, who are the Rephaim, who are opposite ZA de Klipa.
231) Anakim  are the fifth kind of mixed multitude. They slight those of whom it is written, “And chains about your neck,” referring to the Israel who keep the Torah. It is written that Rephaim are also regarded as Anakim because Rephaim and Anakim are equal. They are the ones who drive the world back to chaos . The thing is that the Temple has been ruined, and it is written about it, “And the earth was unformed and void ,” since the Temple is the core of the world and the settling of the world. This is why it is considered that the earth was in Tohu ve Bohu.
Those two kinds of mixed multitude that mingled with Israel cause the ruin of the Temple. As soon as the light, who is the Creator, comes to Israel, they will be obliterated from the world and will be lost. But the redemption of Israel does not depend on blotting them out, but only on blotting out Amalek, until he is blotted out, for in him is the oath, as it is written, “The hand upon the throne of the Lord: the Lord will have war with Amalek from generation to generation.”
Moses and Two Messiahs
232) “These are the generations of the heaven and the earth.” “These” cancels the first ones, meaning those of whom it was said, “These are your gods, Israel,” which is the sin of the calf. On the day in which the Creator blots out the sin of the calf, it is as though on that day the Creator made the heaven and the earth, as it is written, “In the day that the Lord God made earth and heaven.” This is so because at that time the Creator will be in a Zivug with His Divinity and the world will be renewed, as it is written, “For when as the new heaven and new earth that I make stand before Me, so will your seed stand.” This is “In the day that the Lord God made,” in the day when the world is renewed.
233) At that time, it is written, “Out of the ground the Lord God caused to grow every tree that is pleasing.” But before that, before the sin of the calf was blotted out, the rain of Torah, ZA, does not come down to the sowing of the souls of Israel, and Israel—who are like the grass of the field and like trees—do not grow. It is written, “No shrub of the field was yet in the earth, and no herb of the field yet sprung up ... and there was not a man to till the ground.” “A man” means Israel. “Ground” means the Temple. “To till” means the work of the offerings.
234) “No shrub of the field” applies to the first Messiah, Messiah Son of David, before he is in the land. “No herb of the field” applies to the second Messiah, Messiah Son of Joseph. Why were there no Messiahs in the land? It was because Moses was not with them. It is written about him, “And there was not a man to till the ground.” “The scepter shall not depart from Judah” is Messiah Son of David. “Nor the ruler's staff from between his feet” is Messiah Son of Joseph. “Until Shiloh comes” is Moses, since Moses in Gematria is Shiloh. And unto him shall the obedience of the peoples be” is the letters of “And Levi Kohat,” meaning that the correction will go from Moses through Kohat, to Levi, who are his fathers.
What is the meaning of the two Messiahs and the difference between them? Why can they appear only after the disclosure of the soul of Moses? It is because of the association of Midat ha Rachamim with Din, when Malchut was included in Bina, the Atzmut  of Malchut was taken out, and there are only the first nine of Malchut in her, the inclusion of Malchut in them, while her own self was concealed in Rosh Atik. For this reason, Malchut de ZA divided into two kingdoms: from the Chazeh and above she is the tent of Leah, the covered world, and from there extends the Messiah Son of David, the son of Leah. From the Chazeh and below, it is the tent of Rachel, the revealed world, from which Messiah Son of Joseph extends, the son of Rachel.
It follows that there are ten complete Sefirot in Malchut from Chazeh and above, but in Malchut from Chazeh and below, her Malchut lacks and she ends at Yesod. For this reason there is a dispute between Messiah Son of David and Messiah Son of Joseph concerning the purpose of the end of correction. Messiah Son of David wishes to be king, to lead Israel in his Behina, from Malchut above the Chazeh, where the Zivug is perfect, from the face of the man. This is why his illumination is complete. But Messiah Son of Joseph is not pleased with the leadership of Messiah Son of David because he is from the covered world and his illumination is from below upward, for all that extends from Chazeh and above does not illuminate from above downward but only from below upward.
This is why he wishes to be king and to lead Israel, to illuminate for them from his Behina, from Malchut from the Chazeh and below, who illuminates from above downward in open guidance, as she is the revealed world. This is the dispute that was between Saul and David because Saul was of Rachel’s children, Messiah Son of Joseph, and David was of Leah’s children, Messiah Son of David. It is likewise between Rehav’am and Yerav’am. Similarly, in every generation you will find those two slandering one another.
This is what Jonathan, Son of Saul, said to David, “And I will shoot three arrows sideward ... If I say unto the lad: ‘Behold, the arrows are on this side of you; take them, and come; for there is peace to you.’ But if I say thus unto the boy: ‘Behold, the arrows are beyond you; go your way; for the Lord has sent you away.’”
We should understand why Jonathan chose these signs. The three arrows are three branches of the letter Shin . These are three Sefirot HGT, implying the three legs of the throne, where David is their fourth leg. They also imply three branches of the lower Shin, which are three Sefirot NHY, where Malchut of the house of Joseph is their fourth, the seventh of the sons. This is why they are called “arrows,” since these three branches were halved and divided between Messiah Son of David and Messiah Son of Joseph . The three above the Chazeh go to Messiah Son of David, and the three below the Chazeh to Messiah Son of Joseph.
It is written, “But if I say thus unto the boy: ‘Behold, the arrows are beyond you,’” from below upward, like the nature of illumination of the three branches above the Chazeh, which is Messiah Son of David, know for certain that you are at peace. It is a sign that Saul’s father, who is Messiah Son of Joseph, confesses to your leadership and does not contemplate killing you. “But if I say thus unto the youth: ‘Behold, the arrows are beyond you,’” meaning from above downward, revealed, like the three branches from Chazeh and below, which is the quality of Messiah Son of Joseph, then “Go your way; for the Lord has sent you away,” as it is a sign that he is envious of you and wishes to kill you and revoke your leadership, to lead Israel by the illumination of Messiah Son of Joseph from above downward in the revealed.
It follows that the reason for Malchut’s division into two kingdoms—Leah and Rachel—from which two Messiahs come, Messiah Son of David and Messiah Son of Joseph is due to the absence of Malchut de Malchut, which cannot be included prior to the end of correction. This is why the complete Malchut was nonetheless established above the Chazeh, Leah, by whose force Rachel, too, receives her correction, although she is lacking the Malchut de Malchut—through her ascent and Hitkalelut  with Leah.
Know that Malchut de Malchut is the letter Hey in Moses, and it is the 50th gate, called “A path which the eagle does not know.” An eagle is Moses, since there are KHB TM in Malchut, each of which consists of ten, thus they are 50 gates. And since the Malchut de Malchut is missing, there are only 49 gates in her. In terms of the Kelim, Malchut de Malchut is missing, and in terms of the lights, she lacks the Keter, since there is an inverse relation between Kelim and lights. The Hey of Moses is the missing Malchut, the 50th gate, and she is the reason for the division into Messiah Son of David and Messiah Son of Joseph.
The two Messiahs do not have the power to redeem Israel, only Moses. It is because of him that they are detained and do not redeem Israel, for as long as the Hey of Moses is not corrected, there must be two Malchuts so that at least one of them is completely whole, meaning from Chazeh and above, and the other will receive her wholeness through the first. For this reason, the Messiahs that extend from them are also incomplete because the illumination of Messiah Son of David is incomplete, as she is covered Hassadim. The lower ones need disclosed Hassadim, and the illumination of Messiah Son of Joseph, who extends from Rachel, is incomplete because Rachel’s entire correction depends on Leah. Hence, her illumination is diminished, so she is unable to illuminate her revealed Hassadim, except from below upward, like Leah.
This is why Messiah Son of Joseph is disputed with Messiah Son of David, and she wishes to correct Rachel so she does not need to receive from Leah, and then Rachel will illuminate from above downward, too. Thus, both are incomplete, which is why it was said that the two Messiahs do not have the power to redeem Israel before the Hey of Moses is corrected and the 50th gate appears. Because of it, they are detained, due to the Hey of Moses that is not receiving her complete correction.
The Hey of Moses is mortgaged with Abraham, and from the Hey of Abraham—for him to have in her an everlasting name—the Hey of Moses was completed in her. It is so because the Hey of Abraham is the Hey that is mitigated in Midat ha Rachamim, the small Hey of Abraham, and the Hey of BeHibaraam . Were it not for that mitigation, there would be no existence of Mochin for ZON and for the lower ones. Those Mochin are the disclosure of His holy names, for which He has created the world. It follows that as long as the Hey of Abraham did not disclose all the Mochin up to disclosing all of His holy names, it is impossible to revoke the mitigation of Malchut in Bina, hence the Hey of Moses will not be able to become revealed.
However, once the mitigated Hey, the Hey of Abraham, reveals all His holy names, the association of Midat ha Rachamim with Din—which is the Hey of Abraham—will be cancelled and the Hey of Moses will appear in full. Thus, the Hey of Moses is mortgaged with Abraham, with the Hey of Abraham, and as long as the Hey of Abraham has not disclosed all the necessary Mochin, she detains the disclosure of Moses’ Hey.
Indeed, upon the completion of the disclosure of all His holy names, the association with Bina will be cancelled and Moses’ Hey, which is concealed in Rosh de Atik, will be revealed, as it is written, “The stone which the builders loathed shall become the cornerstone.” At that time the two Malchuts, Leah and Rachel, will return to being one complete Partzuf, and Messiah Son of David and Messiah Son of Joseph will return to being one in full completeness, and will redeem Israel.
235) “No shrub of the field” is the souls of the righteous who extend from Yesod de ZA, a righteous who lives forever, since Siach  has the letters Shin Het-Yod. A mere Shin indicates the three branches of the tree, the three patriarchs, HGT de ZA, who is called “a tree.” But the Shin of Siach  is not from ZA but from the one who lives forever, Yesod de ZA. This is why there are the letters Het-Yod in Siach, indicating that the Shin is from Hay , Yesod de ZA. Therefore, “No shrub of the field” indicates the souls of the righteous who extend from Yesod de ZA, implied in the word Siach.
236) “No herb of the field.” Esev  has the letters Ayin-Bet  Shin. Shin indicates three leaves, YAHDONHY , the combination of HaVaYaH and ADNI, indicating the Zivug of the names HaVaYaH, ZA, with ADNI, the Nukva. They are AB, HaVaYaH filled with the letters Yod, which are AB (72) in Gematria, Mochin of illumination of Hochma, which appears in a Zivug of the two names YAHDONHY .
There are three Zivugim in ZON: 1) Zivug de GAR, HaVaYaH EKYEH; 2) Zivug de HGT, HaVaYaH Elokim; 3) Zivug de NHY, HaVaYaH ADNI.
Mochin de AB is Mochin de Haya. They are not extended until the Zivug is complemented with the third combination, HaVaYaH ADNI, too. Then the souls of the righteous are born from the third Zivug HaVaYaH ADNI, which indicates the Zivug of NHY de ZON. The souls of the righteous are not born from the two previous combinations because they are extended only from Mochin de AB, which is illumination of Hochma, which appears neither in HBD nor in HGT, but only in NHY, in the Zivug of the names YAHDONHY.
These NHY are implied in the Shin of the world Esev , where the three lines of the Shin are the three Sefirot NHY. They are called “three leaves” and not “three branches,” HGT. They are called “leaves” to indicate that they hang on the three branches, HGT, and receive their abundance from them. The Mochin for the souls of the righteous that are born from them are implied in the Ayin Bet of the word Esev, HaVaYaH filled with letters Yod, which are AB  in Gematria, indicating their Mochin.
The branches, HGT, on which the three leaves NHY hang, add up to AB  because each of the three branches, HGT, contains the count of the name AB—there is the name AB in Hesed, as well as in Gevura, as well as in Tifferet, in the three verses, “And went,” “And ... came,” and “And ... pitched.”
The Mochin de AB do not conjoin with Divinity until Adam comes, HaVaYaH filled with Alephs, Yod He Vav He, who is Moses, as it is written, “What is his name and what is the name of his son?” He corrected Divinity and extended the complete unification YAHDONHY. It is written, “And there was not a man to till the ground,” referring to Moses who still did not properly correct Divinity.
237) This is why it is written about Moses, “No shrub of the field was yet in the earth,” meaning that the righteous, Moses, has not yet grown, from whom the verse, “Truth springs from the earth,” is written, and of whom it is written in regard to truth, “Cast truth to the ground,” referring to disciples of the wise, who are like grasses that grow in the earth. They do not grow and do not come out of the Divinity in exile until the verse “Truth springs from the earth,” comes true.
Truth is Moses, of whom it is written, “There was true law in his mouth,” for there is no one to interpret Divinity like him. This is why it is written about him, “And there was not a man to till the ground.” “Man” is Moses, “earth” is Divinity, and before Moses came, there was no one to properly correct Divinity.
238) As soon as Moses came, it is written, “And a mist went up from the earth.” Aleph-Dalet  from the name ADNI, the Vav comes up, and with it, he becomes master of the whole earth. ZA is Vav. When Moses comes, ZA ascends and unites with Divinity, ADNI, and then Divinity becomes the master of all the earth.
“And a mist went up from the earth,” who is Divinity, ADNI. ADNI is a name of a female, hence only two letters rise from the name, which are Aleph-Dalet. ZA, Vav, ascends and unites with her, and then she receives from him complete Mochin and becomes master of all the earth. That is, where she was previously called ADNI, female, now she is called “master,” male.
Promptly, “And watered the whole face of the earth.” Israel below will be watered and receive from Divinity the Mochin de GAR, which are called “seventy faces to the Torah,” since Panim  is GAR, as it is written, “A man’s wisdom shall illuminate his face.” Also, seventy is ZAT, HGT NHY, each of which consists of ten, and the thirty upper ones are unattainable.
239) Another interpretation to the verse, “And a mist went up from the earth” is as it is translated, “And a cloud went up from the earth.” Divinity, of whom it is written, “For the cloud of the Lord was upon the tabernacle,” in the end when Moses comes, Divinity will rise and the disciples of the wise in the earth will be watered and receive the Mochin from her.
240) At that time it is written, “And the Lord God formed the man,” meaning Israel. The Creator formed them in forms of this world and the next world. “Forms” means levels of Mochin. At that time the Creator will impart upon them Mochin of Malchut, who is called “this world,” and of Bina, who is called “the next world.”
“Formed” is written with two Yods , indicating that at that time the Creator instills Israel into His name, in the depiction of two letters Yod, with a Vav in between them, which add up to 26 in Gematria. Also, two letters Yod are depicted in His face and in the faces of Israel in their two cheekbones, and with their noses they form the letter Vav.
In the beginning of the words, “And formed,” there is Vav in the beginning, then two letters Yod. This implies the Mochin that extend from the unification of HaVaYaH ADNI, YAHDONHY, in which there is Yod in the beginning, implying upper Hochma, and Yod at the end, implying lower Hochma, and six letters AHDONH between the two letters Yod. These are ZA, who receives from the upper Hochma in Bina, the next world, and gives to the bottom Hochma, Malchut, this world, giving them to Israel. These Mochin are depicted in Israel in the two faces with the nose, as it is written, “And man’s wisdom shall illuminate his face,” since the Mochin de GAR are called “face,” and the two faces are the two lines right and left, and the nose is the line that decides between them.
241) This is why it is written, “For from the top of the rocks I see him.” The word “rocks” indicates those depictions of the holy name that are depicted in their faces in two precious tablets, which are Yod Yod, on which the Vav is carved. “From the top,” from Mochin de GAR. “Rocks” means measures of the level of Mochin, which are called “depictions,” the imparting of Mochin de Hochma, called “vision,” as these Mochin are depicted in the two cheekbones, which are two tablets, right and left, which are two letters Yod of the unification YAHDONHY, and the six letters AHDONH are carved on them like a nose.
242) Also, he depicted for them for all the generations in his upper mate, Yod-Hey, and they are Vav, the unification of both of them. Indeed, the imparting of Mochin in regard to “And formed” is applied to all generations, not necessarily to the time of the end. The Creator depicts and imparts Mochin to Israel for all the generations in His upper mate, Bina, Yod-Hey that unite in the Vav, for this is why Bina has the letters of Ben Yod-Hey , implying to the son, ZA, who unites Yod-Hey.
The Creator depicts and bestows upon Israel by those depictions of above because ZA is called Israel, the middle pillar, including both the upper Divinity and the lower one together. They are the Shema reading of evening and of morning, and it was said about them, “A bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh.” When ZON obtain Mochin de Haya, the two females, Leah and Rachel, become for him one Partzuf, and then he is called by the name Israel, the letters Li Rosh .
The Creator depicts and bestows upon Israel by those depictions of above, Mochin de Haya. At that time ZA—the middle pillar, which includes the upper Divinity and the lower one together, Leah and Rachel, who became one Partzuf—is called Israel, and Israel includes them together. The upper Divinity is the Shema reading of the morning, and the lower Divinity is the Shema reading of the evening, as it is written, “A bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh,” since the upper Divinity, Leah, is called “bone,” and the lower Divinity, Rachel, is called “flesh.” By being the construction of AVI, the two became one Partzuf. This is why it was said about her, “A bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh.”
243) Immediately at that time, when Moses appears at the time of the end, He plants Israel in the holy Garden of Eden, meaning that Leah and Rachel will have become one Partzuf, the Garden of Eden, and Israel, ZA, includes them both. It is considered that Israel are in the Garden of Eden because Eden is the upper Divinity, and garden is the lower Divinity. When they are mingled together, they are called “Garden of Eden,” since in all the generations, he gives to Israel Mochin from the Garden of Eden. However, they are impermanent because they themselves are outside the Garden of Eden. At the time of the end, the Creator will raise Israel to the Garden of Eden as with Adam HaRishon prior to the sin, and then the Mochin will be permanent forever.
It is written, “And the Lord God planted a garden in Eden.” This is AVI, who build the Nukva. A garden is the lower Divinity, Eden is upper Ima. “And there He placed the man whom He had formed.” The man is the middle pillar, called Israel. Then, when the two of them become one Partzuf, which is the Garden of Eden, Divinity will be His plantation, His mate, who will never leave Him, and will be His Eden for eternity. The Creator planted Israel at that time as a holy plantation in the world, meaning that when Israel receive those Mochin they become a holy plantation in the world, as it is written, “The branch of My planting, the work of My hands, wherein I glory.”
244) “And out of the ground the Lord God,” AVI, “Made to grow every tree that is pleasant.” The righteous, Yesod de ZA, is called “tree,” and he is pleasant. “Good to eat” means ZA, the middle pillar, in whom there is food and nourishment for all. He gives the Mochin to all the lower ones, and there is everything in him, in ZA, and the righteous—Yesod de ZA—is sustained only by ZA, and Divinity from the righteous. They do not need the lower ones to raise MAN but rather the lower ones are nourished by the upper Yesod and Divinity without them having to raise MAN.
It is so because in the exile, Divinity and the one who lives forever, Yesod de ZA, who gives to Divinity, had no nourishment except by raising MAN through the eighteen blessings in the prayer. But at the time of the end, Yesod will be giving nourishments to all, to Divinity and to the lower ones, without them needing any awakening of the lower one.
245) The tree of life, ZA, will be planted in the garden, Divinity, and then it is written about him, “And he took also of the tree of life and ate, and lived forever.” In the exile, ZA was not planted inside Divinity because his Zivug was impermanent, but coincidental. But at the end of time ZA will always be planted inside the garden in a never ending Zivug. This is “And ate and lived forever,” permanently.
Divinity will no longer be controlled by the tree of the Sitra Achra, which is the mixed multitude, who are the tree of knowledge of good and evil, and she will no longer receive into her that which is impure, meaning she will not sustain the Tuma’a. And for this reason, the Tuma’a will be cancelled in the world. It is written about that time, “The Lord alone will guide him and there is no foreign God with him,” since all the evil and Tuma’a will be obliterated from the world. This is why in the days of Messiah, proselytes are not accepted and Divinity will be like a vine, not receiving grafting of another kind.
246) Israel will be as it is written, “Every tree that is pleasant to the sight,” and will repossess that glory which they had lost in the ruin of the Temple, of which it is written “He has cast down from heaven unto the earth the glory of Israel.”
The tree of knowledge of good and evil was separated and repelled from Israel, and they do not cling or mingle with them, for then it was said to Israel, “And of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, you shall not eat of it,” which is the mixed multitude. At that time the Creator will reveal to Israel that on the day when they ate of the tree of knowledge they caused two losses, the ruin of the First Temple and the Second Temple. It is written, “On the day when you eat of it you will surely die.” Death is mentioned twice , in relation to both temples, and this disclosure that the Creator discloses before Israel at the time is regarded as Him telling them not to eat of the tree of knowledge, as He had told Adam HaRishon.
Through the tree of knowledge, they caused the righteous, who bestows upon Divinity, to be ruined and dry out in the First Temple, which is the upper Divinity, and in the Second Temple, which is the lower Divinity, as it is written, “And the river will be ruined and dried out.” The river is ZA. Ruined means in the bottom Hey, in his Nukva, since he departed from ZA, the fountain of the Creator, who springs to the bottom Hey as Ein Sof.
247) As soon as Israel come out of the exile a holy nation in itself, when the mixed multitude part from them, promptly, that river which was ruined and dried during the exile, it is written about it, “And a river comes out of Eden,” meaning the Vav in the name HaVaYaH, “To water the garden,” the bottom Hey. “And a river” means the middle pillar, ZA, “Comes out of Eden” means upper Ima, and ZA receives the abundance from her. “To water the garden” means the lower Divinity, a garden.
248) At that time it was said to Moses and to Israel, “Then shall you delight in the Lord,” Oneg  is the acronym of Eden, Nahar, Gan . The Ayin of Oneg is Eden, the Nun is Nahar , and the Gimel is Gan . That is, then they will delight in those Mochin that hang down to them by the three degrees—Eden, river, garden—which are Mochin of upper Hochma, for Bina is called Eden only when she receives from Hochma.
Then the verse, “Then shall Moses sing” comes true. It is not written, “Then Moses sang,” but “Shall sing,” in future tense, indicating the time of the exit of the children of Israel from the exile, when Moses will sing a new song, and for the mixed multitude, as well as for the nations and the idol worshippers, the Oneg  will turn into a Nega . It is just as Pharaoh and Egypt were afflicted when boils and Smallpox were rampant among them. Rather, then only Israel will have pleasure, meaning those Mochin of Eden, river, garden, who will be pleasure for Israel. They themselves will strike the mixed multitude and idol worshippers with great afflictions.
249) “And a river comes out of Eden to water the garden, and from there it parted and became four heads.” These are the four Sefirot Hesed, Gevura, Netzah, and Hod, corresponding to the four banners of the tribes. The four camps of Divinity are four heads: Michael, Gabriel, Nuriel, Raphael. In each camp there are three Behinot according to the four banners, which are 12. The garden itself, Divinity, complements them to 13.
Hesed is the right arm. At that time the words, “He who wishes to grow wise shall go south,” shall come true. That is, anyone who wishes to grow wise will aim in his prayer to Hesed, south, and will draw Hochma  and grow wise. The camp of Angel Michael will be watered and they will receive their abundance from that Hesed, and with it the staff of Judah and the two tribes.
Gevura is the left arm. At that time the words, “He who wishes to grow rich shall go north” shall come true. Anyone who wishes to grow rich shall aim in his prayer toward Gevura, north, and the camp of Angel Gabriel receive from the Gevura, and with him the camp of Dan and the two tribes.
Netzah is the right leg, from whom the camp of Nuriel receive, and the staff of Reuben with him, as well as the two tribes that are with him.
Hod is the left leg. It is written about Jacob, “And he was limping on his leg.” The camp of Raphael—appointed over the healing of the exile—receive from him, and with him the staff of Ephraim and two tribes.
It follows that four heads are 12, like the four banners are 12 tribes, which the garden complements to 13. This is the meaning of what was said, that then only Israel will have pleasure, as it is written, “And a river comes out,” since the 13th is the pleasure.
250) Another interpretation to the words, “And from there it parted and became four heads.” This is the meaning of the four that went into an orchard , the four sages, Ben Azai, Ben Zoma, Acher , and Rabbi Akiva. PARDESS is an acronym for Peshat, Remez, Drush, Sod . “And from there it parted” is an acronym of Peshat, Remez, Drush, by which Ben Azai, Ben Zoma, and Acher entered. They are the Klipot of the Torah compared to Sod, which is the internality, in which Rabbi Akiva entered. He says that only Rabbi Akiva—who entered in Mocha, in Sod, the internality of the Torah—entered in peace and came out in peace. But the other three, who entered in Peshat, Remez, Drush, were harmed.
One of the four sages entered through the river Pishon, implying the literal part of the Torah, who illuminates in PARDESS, since Pishon has the letters of “a mouth reciting laws” , meaning the literal Torah.
The second one among them entered through the river Gichon, and there the one of whom it is written, “Whatsoever goes upon the belly”—meaning Moses, the Vav of Gachon , which is big and is the middle of all the letters of the Torah—is buried, and it is discerned as Gabriel, whose letters are Gavar El , Gevura of El, since any burial is to atone a flaw, as it is written, “And will atone for His land, His people.” Once the flaw was atoned for him, he stands for the revival of the dead for eternity.
That is Moses’ burial is not because of Moses’ flaw, but from Gabriel, Gevura of above, who prevailed over him and did not let him correct and reveal the wholeness during his life, although for himself he could have revealed all the wholeness. It is written about him, “To a man whose way is hidden, and whom God has hedged in,” meaning whose way was hidden and did not reveal his wholeness because God has hedged him in, and not because of Moses’ inferiority.
This is why, no one knows his burial place, where he was revealed, to this day, since the place of the flaw is the place of the burial. And since there was no flaw in him, no one knew his burial place. But at the end of correction, when Moses’ wholeness is revealed, the deficiency will be apparent out of the wholeness that will have been made revealed, which is his burial place. This is the implied part of the Torah, and to the wise, it is informed with an intimation.
251) The third among the four sages entered Hidekel , whose letters are Had Kal , indicating witty and without a flaw, for whom interpreting is easy. Sharp means witty, as in “And you shall teach them diligently unto your sons.”
The fourth among the sages entered through the Euphrates, which is a Moach , where there are multiplication, since the semen extends from the brain.
Explanation: The Mochin imparted upon the lower ones generally divide into three Behinot:
Illumination of VAK without a Rosh, Yetzira, which is called Remez . Their understanding is limited, like mere hints.
Mochin de GAR from Hassadim that extend from the world of Beria. This is considered Drush , drawing a man’s heart.
Mochin de GAR from Hochma that extends from the world of Atzilut, considered Sod .
There are also Kelim that extend from the world of Assiya, which are called Peshat , the part of the work.
Authors, who were counting all the letters in the Torah, would say, “The Vav of Gachon ,” the half of the letters of the book of Torah. “Diligently inquired” is half of the words, and “Shaven” is half of the verses. It is so because in the world of correction, the degrees were divided by the Parsa into two halves. The half above the Parsa is considered the Panim  of the degree, and the half below the Parsa is considered the Achor  of the degree. Without that correction of the Parsas, the lower ones would not be fit to receive any Mochin because all the Mochin come from the descents and ascents of those Parsas. In general, only four Parsas are discerned in ABYA because they are generally divided into two Partzufim, where all the Partzufim of Atzilut are considered one Partzuf, and the three worlds BYA are considered one Partzuf.
There are two Parsas in Atzilut: in the middle of Atzilut, at the place of Chazeh de AA, which divides between Panim and Achor, and at the end of Atzilut, which divides between Atzilut and Beria. There are also two Parsas in Partzuf BYA—in the middle of BYA, in the place of Chazeh in the world of Yetzira, which divides between Panim and Achor, and at the end of Partzuf BYA, in Bina de Malchut of the world of Assiya. All the Mochin to the lower ones are imparted from those four Parsas:
The Kelim for Mochin, which are Peshat , are imparted from the bottom Parsa in Assiya.
VAK without a Rosh, which are Remez , are imparted from Parsa in the middle of BYA.
GAR de Hassadim, which are Drush , are imparted from Parsa between Atzilut and Beria.
GAR de Hochma, which are Sod , are imparted from the Parsa in the middle of Atzilut.
These three Mochin are regarded as letters, words, and verses in the book of Torah:
VAK without a Rosh is considered letters before they join into words, where the understanding, the Remez, is still not revealed in them.
When they join into words a little understanding is revealed in them, GAR de Hassadim, Drush.
When the words join into complete sentences in verses, their understanding is completed entirely. This is GAR de Hochma, Sod.
The Vav of Gachon  is at half of the letters of the book of Torah, the Parsa at Chazeh de Yetzira, dividing BYA into two halves. Mochin of Remez are imparted from this Parsa, the letters of Torah without combination, since the half from Chazeh de Yetzira and below became the place of the Klipot. This is why it was said about her, “Whatsoever goes upon the belly,” which is the impure serpent, whose place is from this Vav and below.
“Diligently inquired” is half of the words, Parsa at the end of Atzilut, separating Atzilut from BYA, from which the Mochin de GAR de Hassadim are imparted, who are called Drush. This is why it was said about her, “Diligently inquired,” implying Drush.
“Shaven” is half the verses, the Parsa in the world of Atzilut itself, at the place of Chazeh de AA, from which the GAR of illumination of Hochma, called Sod , is imparted. This is why “Shaven” was said about her, since hair implies Dinim, and through the Mochin of illumination of Hochma, imparted from this Parsa, they are cancelled and are as hair that was shaved, and there are no Dinim there. This is why Rabbi Akiva was considered bald—since he entered in Mocha, which is Sod, from which there is the Parsa—and shaven. This is also why his hair, the Dinim, went bald.
This is the river that comes out of Eden, Bina, who came out because of the Parsa at Chazeh de AA, outside of Hochma, who is called Eden. She did that to water the garden, to give Mochin to Nukva de ZA, who is called “garden.” “And from there it parted and became four heads.” Because of the Parsa that took Bina outside of Eden, the degrees parted and became four heads, which are four rivers, four illuminations that extend from the four Parsas, which are called PARDESS, since a river means light.
Those four sages who went into the PARDESS entered by those four rivers that extend from the four Parsas:
The river Pishon, Peshat, extends from Parsa de Assiya.
The river Gichon, Vav of Gachon , Remez, extends from Parsa de Yetzira. Those GAR that are missing here in the Vav of Gachon are GAR de Hochma. It was said that a wise man is informed with a Remez , meaning that what is considered a Remez means VAK without GAR, meaning only for a wise man who needs Mochin of illumination of Hochma. Yet, with regard to Mochin de Hassadim, there are GAR there as in Beria. But Yetzira needs illumination of Hochma, and GAR de Hassadim are not enough for it.
Those GAR of illumination of Hochma that are missing in the Vav of Gachon are the completion of the soul of Moses, who will be revealed only at the end of correction, when Moses stands at the revival of the dead. The wholeness of the soul of Moses is buried and hidden in the Vav of Gachon, and can appear only at the revival of the dead, when Moses returns to Israel and the two Messiahs with him, when the GAR appear in Yetzira. It is so because then all the Parsas will be cancelled and the three worlds BYA return to being Atzilut, and GAR de Hochma will illuminate in Yetzira as in Atzilut, the revelation of the soul of Moses.
Pure Marble Stones
252) Rabbi Elazar said, “One day the friends asked, ‘What does it mean what Rabbi Akiva said to his students, ‘When you reach pure marble stones do not say ‘Water, water,’ lest you risk yourselves because it was said, ‘He who speaks lies shall not be established before My eyes.’’’”
In the meantime, the elder of elders came down there. HB are called “elders,” and Keter, who is above HB, is called “elder of elders.” He is the disclosure of the soul of Yechida, destined to be revealed in the world at the end of correction.
He said to them, “What are you engaged in?” They replied to him that they were engaged in what Rabbi Akiva said to his students, “When you reach marble stones.” He said to them, “Clearly, there is a high meaning here, but it was interpreted in the seminary of above. To prevent your erring in that meaning, I have come down to you to explain it. And because that secret has already been revealed among you, a secret that is hidden from the people of the generation, it means that that secret—which is hidden from all your contemporaries—has already been reveled to you, so it is possible to explain it to you in full.
253) Indeed there are pure marble stones there, from which pure water comes out. They are implied by two letters Yod in the letter Aleph, at its top and at its bottom. The Vav in the Aleph, which is slanted between the two letters Yod, is the tree of life, that all who eat of it lives forever, and those two letters Yod in the Aleph are implied in the verse, “And formed,” in which there are two letters Yod . These are two Yetzirot , Yetzira of the upper ones and Yetzira of the lower ones. They are also the two letters Yod—at the beginning and at the end of the name YAHDONHY—which mean Hochma at the beginning of the name, and Hochma at the end of the name. They are also called “the concealments of Hochma” because they are concealed from the upper Hochma below the upper Keter.
Keter de AA is called “upper Keter.” Below him is Hochma de AA, one inside the other. She is called HS because she was concealed and does not give to the Partzufim of Atzilut. Hochma that is imparted in Atzilut is only from Bina, who becomes Hochma through her ascent to Rosh AA. That Bina is called upper Hochma. When ZA receives from her and gives to the Nukva, Nukva is called “lower Hochma,” and those two Hochmot are called “concealments of Hochma,” as they are concealed from Hochma in relation to the upper Hochma of AA below his Keter, HS, for they could not receive anything from her.
Those two Hochmot are two letters Yod, Rosh and Sof  in the name YAHDONHY. They are also the two letters Yod in the verse, “And formed”: 1) Yetzira of the upper ones, the next world, who extend from the upper Hochma, Bina; 2) Yetzira of the lower ones, in this world, who extend from the bottom Hochma, Malchut, Nukva de ZA.
They are two letters Yod in the letter Aleph. The upper Yod is the upper Hochma, and the bottom Yod is the lower Hochma, and the slanted line between them is ZA, called Vav, and called “the tree of life,” receiving from the upper Hochma, from the upper Yod above it, and giving to the bottom Hochma, the bottom Yod, below it. They are pure marble stones, Bina, who is called “upper Hochma,” and Malchut, who is called “lower Hochma.
254) They correspond to the two eyes from which two tears come down to the great sea, since Hochma is called “eyes”—the right eye corresponding to the upper Hochma, and the left eye corresponding to the lower Hochma. The tears come down because out of these two tablets—Bina and Malchut—Moses brought down the Torah for Israel. The right tablet is Bina and the left one is Malchut, which correspond to two eyes. Israel were not rewarded with them because they broke and fell in the sin of the calf, as it is written, “And broke them under the mountain.” This is what caused the ruin of the first and second Temples, as they, too, extend from the two tablets—the first Temple from the right tablet, upper Hochma, Bina, and the second Temple from the left table, lower Hochma, Malchut. Hence, the flaw of the breaking of the tablets caused their ruin.
This is why two tears went down to the great sea, implying two ruins that were done because of the breaking of the first tablets. The tablets fell and broke because the Vav had departed them, the Vav of “And formed.” The two letters Yod of “And formed”  are two letters Yod in the letter Aleph , which are the two tablets. The Vav of “And formed” is the slanted line between them, the tree of life. After Israel corrected the sin of the tree of knowledge and the filth of the serpent stopped in them, they were rewarded with the tablets, which are the two letters Yod—the upper Hochma and the lower Hochma—and they were rewarded with the tree of life, which is the slanted line between them, freedom from the angel of death.
However, by the sin of the calf, they corrupted their correction, which is why the tree of life departed from them, since the flaw of the tree of knowledge returned to them and they were once again enslaved under the angel of death, and the tablets, which were included with the tree of life, fell and broke. Then He gave them two other tablets, on the part of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, from which they were given the Torah in a manner of prohibition and permission. On the right there is life, and on the left there is death, as we learn, “To those who go right in her—the potion of life; to those who go left in her—the potion of death.”
255) This is what Rabbi Akiva warned his students, “When you reach pure marble stones do not say ‘Water, water,’ lest you risk yourselves.” That is, do not equate stones of pure marble to other stones, which are life and death, from which, as it is written, “A wise heart at his right and a foolish heart at his left.” Moreover, you will be risking yourselves because these stones of the tree of knowledge of good and evil are in separation, and the pure marble stones are in unification, without any separation at all.
If you say, “But the tree of life departed them at the time of the sin of the calf and they fell and broke, hence there is separation among them,” “He who speaks lies shall not be established before My eyes,” since above there is no separation in them. It is so because those who broke were of those stones of pure marble, hence there is no separation in them like stones of pure marble. For this reason, they are regarded as though they had never been broken.
Explanation: The Torah is called “water,” as we learn, “There is no water but the Torah.” The origin of the Torah is the two tablets of testimony, which are Bina and Malchut. This is why they are called “Two stone tablets,” as they spring out water, which is the Torah. Israel received the first tablets in wholeness, as it will be at the end of correction, as it is written, “It is engraved  on the tablets,” do not pronounce it Harut, but Herut , for they were freedom from the angel of death, as it will be at the end of correction. However, through the sin of the calf they corrupted the correction and the domination of the angel of death returned upon them and the tablets broke, and they were given second tablets in the form of life and death.
The whole correction is but extension of light of Torah because through the MAN that Israel raise by keeping the Torah and Mitzvot and good deeds, they cause upper Zivugim that gradually reveal the light of Torah to Israel until through it, they are granted with the end of correction. Then the two stone tablets appear, two stones of pure marble, and there is no more “water, water” there, in separation, which are water on the right, which are life, and water on the left, which are death. “Death will be swallowed up forever” and all are pure and all are living. It follows that pure marble stones are a result and an offshoot of the whole of Torah, revealed through the second tablets in regard to “Water, water.”
This is what Rabbi Akiva warned his students, “When you reach pure marble stones do not say ‘Water, water.’” He feared that they would mistakenly think that stones of pure marble are a result of the Torah that was revealed as water, water, separated from the second tablets, for then they would lower the merit of the pure marble stones because although for themselves they are pure water, because they came out from “water, water,” it is enough to come from judgment to be as one who is judged.
This is why he said, “Do not equate pure marble stones to other stones, which are life and death,” for by thinking that pure marble stones are an offshoot, a result of the second tablets, in whom there are life and death, you are equating them to them, for it is enough to come from judgment to be as one who is judged. Thus, you will be slighting the pure marble stones.
Moreover, besides the slighting, you are lying to yourselves because prior to the correction, when the Torah extended from the second tablets in the tree of knowledge of good and evil, the force of separation was ruling. But now that the stones of pure marble have been revealed, the unification without any separation has been revealed, meaning that a matter became revealed that from the beginning there was never any separation. Therefore, how do you think that the first tablets broke and that the tree of life departed from them? This is a complete lie because now it has been revealed that there is no separation above in the first tablets, for these tablets that were broken were actual marble stones of now, and all the dominion that the tree of knowledge of good and evil had in separation for the time being has gone as though it never existed in the world.
It follows that the first tablets did not break at all, and the whole Torah that was revealed and brought about the end of correction actually emerged from the first tablets. Good and evil and life and death were not at all mingled in it, as it seemed to you prior to the correction, in the forms of the second tablets. That is, at the end of correction, when SAM is revoked, it will appear to all that SAM had never lived, but that unity was always ruling, as it is written, “There is none else besides Him.”
A River Comes Out of Eden
256) “And a river comes out of Eden.” It is certain that there are no foreign Klipot in the upper tree of life, ZA de Atzilut, as it is written about it, “No evil shall come to you.” It is so because the Klipot begin in the world of Beria, below Atzilut, but in the tree below the world of Beria there are foreign Klipot, and this tree is planted in the Garden of Eden of ZA below, ZA de Beria, and the tree that is there is called Hanoch  or Matat.
In the Creator’s Garden of Eden, the Garden of Eden of Atzilut, there are no Klipot to have one who is “perverse or crooked” in them. This is why it is written about it, “And a river comes out of Eden.” A river is Matat. “Comes out of Eden” means it is coming out of its Idun , Mochin de Ima, since Bina is called Eden. “To water the garden” means the garden of Matat, his orchard, Malchut de Beria where Ben Azai, Ben Zoma, and Elisha entered. The Klipot of Matat are good on that side and bad on that side. This is the meaning of having prohibition and permission in the Torah, kosher and non-kosher, Tuma’a  and purity.
“A river” is ZA de Atzilut. Eden is upper Ima. Thus, how does it write, “Comes out of Eden,” which means that it departs from the Mochin of upper Ima? After all, in Atzilut there are no Klipot to detain the illumination of Mochin there, so it is possible to say about ZA that it comes and becomes separated from upper Ima? This is why Rabbi Shimon interpreted that a river is Matat, below Parsa de Atzilut, in which Klipot are already possible, separating it from Atzilut and standing in the Garden of Eden of Beria to water it. This is why it is written, “And a river,” Matat, “Comes out of Eden,” of the upper Garden of Eden, Malchut de Atzilut, since it exits and parts from her and comes to Beria, “To water the garden,” the Garden of Eden of Beria, Malchut de Beria, called PARDESS, where Ben Azai, Ben Zoma, and Elisha entered.
257) An old man arose and said to Rabbi Shimon: “Rabbi, Rabbi. It is indeed so—that there are no Klipot in Atzilut, but in Beria. However, Matat is not called ‘the tree of life.’” That is, he was wondering about him: if you interpret the garden in the text to be the Garden of Eden of Beria, how will you interpret the words, “And the tree of life in the midst of the garden”? Thus, the tree of life is not in the garden of Beria, and Matat is not the tree of life because there is good and bad in him.
The thing is this: “And formed” that is written with two letters Yod  indicates two Yetzirot —the good and the bad, the tree of knowledge of good in evil, in which there are those two Yetzirot. The tree of knowledge is the small Adam when he has Mochin de Katnut. At that time, the side of death and the side of life are from him, prohibition and permission. That is, the prohibition brings death, and the permission is life because those two extend from Mochin de Katnut of the man, which are his two Yetzirot. This is why he is called “the tree of knowledge of good and evil.” This is also why it is written about him, “And formed,” with two letters Yod, for it is written about Adam of Katnut, “And the Lord God formed the man from the dust of the ground.”
258) “And breathed into his nostrils the breath  of life,” from the upper Divinity, called Eden and called “repentance.” Two states are presented in this verse: 1) a state of Mochin de Katnut, of which it is written “And the Lord God formed the man from the dust of the ground.” This is considered the tree of knowledge of good and evil because “And formed” indicates two Yetzirot, good and evil. 2) The state of Mochin de Gadlut, of which it is written, “And breathed into his nostrils the breath of life,” since the light of Bina, who is the upper Divinity, is called “the breath of life,” and the light of Bina is Mochin de Gadlut, called Eden. It was said about the Adam of Mochin de Gadlut, “And the tree of life in the midst of the garden,” since in Gadlut, the tree of life is called “the middle pillar,” ZA de Atzilut. The garden is the lower Divinity, and those three ties to it are called Neshama, Ruach, Nefesh: 1) from the upper Divinity, he has Neshama; 2) from ZA de Atzilut, he has Ruach; 3) from the garden, Malchut, the lower Divinity, he has Nefesh.
In them, meaning with the Neshama, Ruach and Nefesh, the man had a Nefesh Haya . It is called “from His mouth,” actually in relation to Divinity, who is the breath  of life. That is, now the words, “And breathed into his nostrils,” seem that He actually breathed with His mouth into the nostrils of Adam HaRishon because the breath of life is the light of the upper Divinity, and that abundance of Divinity also extends from the mouth of ZA. That is, the Mochin de GAR are always poured out from Peh de Rosh, Malchut of the Rosh, which is why it was said, “And breathed,” meaning through the mouth.
This explains the question of Rabbi Shimon, who asked “How come it is written about ZA de Atzilut, ‘And a river comes out of Eden and from there it parted,’ since there are no Klipot in Atzilut to part ZA from Bina for the text to say ‘And from there it parted’?” To that, the old man answered, “The text applies to Adam HaRishon, who has two states—Katnut and Gadlut. In Katnut, it was said about him, “And formed,” which is the two Yetzirot, good and evil. At that time the man is in BYA, among the Klipot, and he is called “the tree of knowledge of good and evil.” The words, “And a river comes out of Eden” imply that state, for then the river, man, comes out of Atzilut, Eden, to the worlds of separation, BYA.
And the words, “And the tree of life in the midst of the garden” apply to the man’s state of Gadlut, when he acquires Neshama, Ruach, Nefesh from Atzilut, for then Atzilut rises and clothes ZA, called “the tree of life,” and the man is also considered the tree of life, like him, since the lower one who clothes the upper one becomes like him. At that time the man was in the Garden of Eden of Atzilut.
Immediately after the old man said those words, he went up. Rabbi Shimon said, “He was surely an angel. And yet, we have supports.” Rabbi Shimon explained the words “And the tree of life in the midst of the garden” as relating to the end of correction, hence the old man did not need to question about him—that Matat is not called “the tree of life”—since the words “And a river comes out of Eden” deal with the 6,000 years, when Matat is in the form of good and evil, while the words “And the tree of life in the midst of the garden” deal with the end of correction when BYA and Matat return to being in Atzilut, and Matat is considered the tree of life.
When Rabbi Shimon saw that the old man did not understand it, he knew he was an angel, for angels have no attainment in what is destined to come at the end of correction, as it is written, “Now it shall be said to Jacob and to Israel, ‘What has God worked?’” That is, then, at the end of correction, the attainment of Israel will be made greater than the attainment of the angels, and the angels will ask Israel what God has worked, since the Emanator corrected the four worlds ABYA as much as necessary for Israel to be able to complete the correction.
However, he did nothing in relation to the end of correction itself, as we learn, “You are with Me in partnership,” I started the worlds and you finish them. This is why the angels, too, have nothing of the end of correction and attain none of it. In that regard, they must ask Israel, “What has God worked?” For this reason, since Rabbi Shimon saw that he did not know how to settle the verses of the tree of life through the end of correction, he realized that he was an angel, that he had no attainment there.
This is why he said, “Not only did the old man not contradict his words, but there was even support in his words to the words of Rabbi Shimon.” According to the old man, the words, “And a river comes out of Eden” relate to the time of Katnut, and the words, “And the tree of life in the midst of the garden” relate to the time of Gadlut. It is similar to the words of Rabbi Shimon who interpreted the words, “And a river comes out of Eden” in relation to the 6,000 years when BYA are in Katnut, separated from Atzilut, and the words “And the tree of life in the midst of the garden” relate to the end of correction, when BYA return to Atzilut and Gadlut. Thus, the words of the old man are similar to the words of Rabbi Shimon and support his words.
And Placed Him in the Garden of Eden
259) Once the old man explained the verses, “And a river comes out of Eden” concerning the Katnut and Gadlut of Adam HaRishon, Rabbi Shimon also explained, “And the Lord God took the man” in relation to Katnut and Gadlut of Adam HaRishon. He asks, “From where did He take the man, where he was before He placed him in the Garden of Eden?” He took him from the four separated Yesodot, of which it is written, “And from there it parted and became four heads,” implying the four Yesodot. The Creator parted the man from those four separated Yesodot and placed him in the Garden of Eden of Atzilut.
As the old man explained the verse, “And a river comes out of Eden” in relation to Adam HaRishon in Katnut, who came out of Atzilut, Eden, and came into the separated BYA, later in Gadlut, he rose to the Garden of Eden of Atzilut, where he received three ties—Neshama, Ruach, Nefesh—which are called “Eden,” “river,” and “garden.” Eden is the light of Bina, Neshama. A garden is the light of Malchut de Atzilut, Nefesh, and the man himself became a river that waters the garden, light of Ruach. This is also how Rabbi Shimon interpreted “And the Lord God took the man and placed him in the Garden of Eden,” since previously, he was in the separated BYA and his Guf was from the four separated Yesodot, but at the time of Gadlut, the Creator separated him from the four separated Yesodot and raised him to the Garden of Eden of Atzilut, and he became the river of Atzilut, receiving from Eden and giving to the garden.
260) As with Adam HaRishon in his Gadlut, when He raised him from the separated BYA to the Garden of Eden of Atzilut, so the Creator will do to a man who repents and engages in Torah. At that time, the Creator takes he who repents from the separated BYA, and it is written about the four separated Yesodot, “And from there it parted.” He separates him from their lusts and places him in His garden, who is Divinity, Malchut, to serve Divinity with the positive Mitzvot , and to keep Divinity with the negative Mitzvot , as it is written, “To serve her and to keep her,” to engage in positive Mitzvot and in negative Mitzvot.
If he is rewarded with keeping the Divinity, he will be a Rosh over the four Yesodot in his Guf and become a river by which they are watered, and not by the Sitra Achra. He is recognized as their Master and ruler because being in the Garden of Eden and keeping the Mitzvot of keeping the Garden of Eden, Divinity, the four Yesodot in his Guf are included in the garden because the garden is his Nefesh. The Guf and the Nefesh  are always included in one another, and since the man himself is a river, receiving the abundance from Eden and watering the garden, it turns out that he waters the four Yesodot in his Guf. At that time he rules over them so they will not crave any lust for themselves and wherever they turn, they will give contentment to their Maker.
261) If he breaches the Mitzvot of the Torah, the four Yesodot in his Guf will be watered by the bitterness of the evil tree, which is the evil inclination. Then it is written about all his organs, which are from the four Yesodot in him, “And they made their lives bitter,” making it bitter with the bitterness of the gall-bladder. There are three harm-doers in the Klipot, opposite the NRN of the man. They are called “liver,” “spleen,” and “gall-bladder.” The liver is opposite the Nefesh, the spleen opposite the Ruach, and the gall-bladder opposite the Neshama, as we learn that a bitter drop  hangs on the sword of the angel of death. This is the precision that he makes here. “And they made their lives bitter” with the bitterness of the gall-bladder, which is the great harm-doer opposite the Neshama. And in regard to the holy organs of the Guf, which are from the side of the good, at that time it is written about them, “And when they came to Marah, they could not drink water from Marah.”
“And they made their lives bitter with hard work,” by asking questions, “With mortar,” by logical reasoning, “And with bricks,” by clarifications of the law, “And in any work of the field,” the Gemarah, “In all their work,” through the Mishnah. It is so because through their iniquities, they caused the Sitra Achra to grip all the parts of their Torah, and to one who was not rewarded, the Torah became a potion of death.
262) If they repent, it is written about them, “And the Lord showed him a tree,” the tree of life, and in it, “And the waters were made sweet ,” for then the bitterness and the potion of death had departed from the Torah, and the sweetness in it, the potion of life, was revealed to him. The tree of life is Messiah Moses, meaning Moses’ soul, to be revealed with the coming of the Messiah. It is written about him prior to the arrival of the Messiah, “With the scepter of God in my hand.” The scepter of God is Matat, from whom there are life and death, as he turns from a serpent into a scepter, and from a scepter into a serpent. When he turned into a scepter, he helped Moses from the good side and life extended from him. When he turned into a serpent, he is opposite from Moses because then death is from his side and promptly, “And Moses fled from before it.”
263) The Creator placed Matat in Moses’ hand to use him as a scepter of God. It is so because in Moses’ hand he is a scepter. He becomes a serpent only when he is not in Moses’ hand. Matat is the oral Torah, in which there is prohibition and permission, a good side and a bad side, like Matat, who is the Torah of Beria. But in Atzilut, it is written, “No evil shall dwell with you,” and the whole of the Torah is the names of the Creator.
Explanation. As there are male and female in Atzilut, ZA and Nukva, there are male and female in Nukva herself because she consists of ten Sefirot. The male in her, who illuminates in her from below upward, is her own Behina . But the male in her, who illuminates from her and below, into the separated BYA, is called Matat.
Two points connected in the Nukva’s Masach—Midat ha Din and Midat ha Rachamim. When the lower ones are worthy, the point of Midat ha Din is concealed and unknown, and she acts from the point of Midat ha Rachamim. At that time only life and good extend from her. If the lower ones sin they disclose the point of Midat ha Din in the Nukva through sins, and the point of Midat ha Rachamim hides. Then death and wickedness extend from her.
It is known that the Dinim in the Masach do not act from below upward, but only from above downward. Therefore, Angel Matat, the male in her, is called “scepter” from her Masach downward because he consists of two points in Malchut. When the lower ones are worthy, he turns toward Hesed. When they are not worthy, he turns toward accusing. It is also considered that he turns from a serpent into a scepter when the lower ones are worthy, and when they are not worthy, he turns from a scepter into a serpent.
This is the meaning of the scepter of God. Moses was using Matat for the tokens and omens that he was making. It was said that the Nukva, the oral Torah, has two points, from which prohibition and permission extend, and Matat extends from those two points. When he struck the rock with it, the Creator took the scepter in His hand, and it is written about it, “And he came down to him with a scepter,” to strike him with it. The scepter is the evil inclination, the serpent, and all the troubles in the exile are because of it, for it is the source of all the afflictions and punishments in the exile.
264) “And from there it parted.” A man who engages in Torah when the Creator takes him from this body, from his four separated Yesodot, he parts from them and goes to become a Rosh in the four animals of the Merkava. It is written about them, “They shall carry you upon their hands.” Instead of being immersed in the four Yesodot of the separated Guf, by engaging in Torah he is rewarded with the Creator separating him from the lusts of the Yesodot of the Guf, raising him high, over the four animals of the Merkava, and the animals carry him, as it is written, “They shall carry you upon their hands, lest your foot stumbles on a stone.”
Idolatry, Bloodshed, Incest
265) “And Lord God commanded the man, saying, ‘From any tree of the garden you may eat freely, but from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil you shall not eat.’” “Commanded” implies prohibition of idolatry, included in the tree of knowledge, as we learn that there is no commandment except on idol-worship, as from the tree of knowledge extend other gods. This is because three transgressions are included in the tree of knowledge: idolatry, incest, and bloodshed.
The Klipa of idol-worship resides in the liver, by which the work becomes heavy , which is idol-worship. The liver is angry for idol-worship because through anger, the liver is made a dwelling place for the Klipa of idol-worship. It was said, “Anyone who is angry, it is as though he is idol-worshipping.” It is written, “Commanded,” telling us about the transgression of idolatry included in the tree of knowledge.
266) The words, “The man” imply bloodshed, included in the tree of knowledge, as it is written, “Whoever sheds man's blood, by man his blood shall be shed.” Here it writes “man,” and in bloodshed it is written “man.” As it is bloodshed there, it is bloodshed here. The Klipot of bloodshed reside in the gall-bladder. It is the sword of the angel of death, with which he puts people to death. The drop of bitterness hangs from the sword of the angel of death, from which he dies. And it is also written, “And her end is bitter as wormwood, sharp as a two-edged sword.”
That is, this is incest, implying the prohibition on incest, included in the tree of knowledge. The Klipa of incest is in the spleen. It is written about it, “She eats and wipes her mouth, and says, ‘I have done no wickedness,’” since there are no mouth or arteries in the spleen to drink with, and it drinks from the black blood in the liver, although there is no mouth in it.
All who shed blood come from the Klipa that resides in the gall bladder. Hence, when the arteries in the heart see a drop of bitterness , they all promptly flee from it, as we learn that the liver is angry and the gall bladder throws a drop in it. It is so because then the blood in the liver flees and his anger chills, and this escape is because the Klipa of those who spill blood is in the gall bladder, hence the bloods fear it and flee from it.
267) The way of those who commit incest is to always hide in the dark, as it is written, “And the eye of the adulterer waits for the twilight, saying, ‘No eye shall see me.’” By that he implies the black blood in the spleen, that the Klipa of incest resides in that black blood, which resembles darkness.
One who has transgressed with bloodshed, with idol-worship, and with incest, his soul incarnates in the three forces of Klipot: liver, gall-bladder, spleen. They are sentenced in Hell and placed under three appointees there, called “harm-doer,” “ire,” and “wrath.”
268) 15 incest are as the sum of Yod-Hey in the name HaVaYaH. Six other incest are six seconds, as the count of Vav de HaVaYaH. Even before Israel were exiled in the exile and Divinity was still with them, the Creator commanded Israel, “Do not uncover the nakedness of your mother,” to not blemish Divinity, the mother of Israel, and this exile is considered the uncovering of the nakedness of Divinity. Israel were exiled for the transgressions of incest, and Divinity in exile is in nakedness of Divinity because the coming of Divinity into exile is considered her nakedness, as it is written, “All who honored her despise her because they saw her nakedness.”
That nakedness of Divinity is Lilit, the mother of the mixed multitude. It is regarded as nakedness because the governance of Divinity and her abundance, the mother of Israel, went to Lilit, the mother of the mixed multitude. The mixed multitude, who receive dominance at the time of the exile, are considered incest of Divinity and incest of the upper Israel, ZA, Divinity’s husband. It is written about the upper Israel, “Do not uncover the nakedness of your father,” since when Divinity is in exile, Lilit and the mixed multitude receive his abundance which he should have given to Divinity. This is why the exile is considered the nakedness of the upper Israel.
269) Those who transgress with incest separate between the first Hey de HaVaYaH and the bottom Hey de HaVaYaH, so the Vav de HaVaYaH will not come between them. It is written, “You shall not uncover the nakedness of a woman and her daughter,” since the first Hey is Ima and the bottom Hey is her daughter. And since the Vav de HaVaYaH, ZA, will not come between them to receive from Ima and to give to her daughter, the woman and her daughter are blemished because preventing the bestowal of the first Hey is also regarded as nakedness to her. A woman and her daughter are the upper Divinity—Ima—and the lower Divinity—her daughter.
The reason why in the exile they cause the Vav to not come between Hey and Hey is that during the exile, when the mixed multitude, which are the five kinds NEGA RA , can come to receive the abundance from the Vav between the Hey and the Hey, at that time the Creator, who is Vav, has no permission to come between them. This is the meaning of “A river shall be ruined and dry.” That is, the abundance of the first Hey, the river, shall be ruined, and the bottom Hey shall be dried for lack of her abundance so the mixed multitude are not nourished by the Vav, the tree of life. For this reason, there is no approach to the Vav between the first Hey and the bottom Hey while the mixed multitude are among them, meaning during the exile, when they can come and nurse from them.
270) The letter Yod of the name HaVaYaH has no permission to approach the bottom Hey because of the mixed multitude, so they do not suckle the abundance from the bottom Hey. It is written, “You shall not uncover the nakedness of your daughter-in-law.” The bottom Hey is considered the daughter-in-law of the Yod, the father, upper AVI, and the Hey is the mother, YESHSUT. The Vav is the son of the Yod, who is AVI, and the bottom Hey is the daughter of the first Hey, YESHSUT. In this way, the bottom Hey is the daughter of the first Hey, and the daughter-in-law of the Yod, as she is the wife of the Vav, who is the son of the Yod. If the Yod gives his abundance to the daughter-in-law, the bottom Hey, during the exile, the mixed multitude will receive the abundance, by which the nakedness of the daughter-in-law will be uncovered. This is the meaning of “You shall not uncover the nakedness of your daughter-in-law.”
They separate between the Vav and the first Hey, as it is written, “You shall not uncover the nakedness of your father’s wife.” Yod is the father, Hey is the mother, Vav is the son, and the bottom Hey is the daughter. This is why He commanded him in regard to the first Hey, “You shall not uncover the nakedness of your father’s wife,” since the first Hey is his father’s wife. It is so because if the Vav should approach to receive abundance from her during the exile, the mixed multitude will suckle from the abundance, by which the nakedness of his father’s wife will be uncovered, as it is her abundance.
The nakedness of your sister, your father’s daughter, is the bottom Hey. “You shall not take her son’s daughter or her daughter’s daughter to uncover her nakedness.” Her son’s daughter and her daughter’s daughter are two letters Hey, the offspring of the bottom Hey. A sister is the name of Hochma, as it is written, “Say unto wisdom , ‘You are my sister.’” When the bottom Hey receives Hochma, she is called “your sister,” your father’s daughter, because then she is attributed to Aba, who is called “upper Hochma,” and the Nukva is called “lower Hochma.” Then she gives birth to the souls of Israel in which there are also complete HaVaYaH, NRNHY. The light of the souls are called “light of Tolada .” These are not the actual light of Atzilut because they pass through the Masach of Malchut.
Hence, her son’s daughter and her daughter’s daughter are two letters Hey, the offspring of the bottom Hey, the first Hey and the bottom Hey of the light of the souls, which are offspring of the bottom Hey, the Nukva de Atzilut. The first Hey of the souls is called “her son’s daughter,” as she extends from the male in the bottom Hey, since Bina is considered male, and the bottom Hey of the souls is considered her daughter’s daughter, as she extends from the Nukva in the bottom Hey. If ZA gives to the first Hey and the bottom Hey of the souls during the exile, the abundance will come to the mixed multitude by which his nakedness will be uncovered.
“The nakedness of your father’s brother” relates to the Yod, the offshoot of Yod de HaVaYaH, who is a brother to the Vav. The Yod of the souls, the Hochma in them, is a light of Tolada from Yod de HaVaYaH, Aba, since the souls do not receive Hochma unless when they are included in ZA when ZA clothes Aba, Yod de HaVaYaH.
Yod is an offshoot of Yod de HaVaYaH, a brother to Vav, since Yod of the souls and the Vav of HaVaYaH, who is ZA, both clothe Aba and are considered brothers. It is so because two Behinot on the same degree are regarded as brothers. During the exile, Israel were forbidden to extend abundance to the Yod of the souls, who is the brother of ZA, Israel’s father, since the abundance would come to the mixed multitude, by which his nakedness would be uncovered.
271) Finally, when the mixed multitude are mingled with Israel, there is no closeness or unification in the letters of the name HaVaYaH. And as soon as the mixed multitude are obliterated from the world, “In that day the Lord will be one and His name ‘One.’” For this reason, when the mixed multitude are not mingled with Israel, Adam, who is Israel, they have unification in the Torah, of which it is written, “She is a tree of life to them who hold her.” The Torah is the queen, Malchut. On her part, Israel are called “sons of kings.” She is called “the Torah of Atzilut,” who is entirely the names of the Creator.
272) This is why the Creator said, “It is not good for the man to be alone; I will make him a help made against him.” The deputy of the queen, the wife of the youth, Matat. That is, “It is not good for the man to be” in the Torah of Atzilut; “I will make him a help made against him,” with the Torah of Beria, the wife of Matat, who is not considered a mistress. Rather, she is called “the deputy  of the Torah,” as she is second to the Torah of Atzilut, the queen. She is the maidservant of Divinity. Sometimes she is help for Divinity, and sometimes she is against her.
If Israel are rewarded, she is help in the form of pure and kosher  permission in the Torah. If they are not rewarded, she is against Divinity in the form of impure, disqualified, forbidden in the Torah. The part of the Torah that is pure kosher permission is on the part of the good inclination. The part of the Torah that is impure, disqualified, and forbidden is on the part of the evil inclination. If there were no evil inclination in the world, there would not be that part in the Torah, and a reason why the Creator said about the Torah of Atzilut, “It is not good for the man to be alone,” until He had to give him the Torah of Beria, the wife of Matat, as help made against him.
273) The woman, who has pure blood and impure blood, is given to him on the part of the Mishnah. She is neither his mate nor his unification because as long as Malchut, the wife of ZA, needs mitigation of Bina and contains two points—from one of which extends pure blood and from one, impure blood—the Zivug is inconstant. If they are not rewarded, impure blood is extended and the Zivug of ZON stops. Thus, the impure blood is given to the Nukva de ZA because of the Mishnah, Matat’s wife, who extends from her. Therefore, the Nukva is not the permanent mate of ZA and is not his complete unification, for there is no complete unification before the mixed multitude is obliterated from the world.
And because of the mixed multitude, Moses was buried outside of the holy land. His burial is in the Mishnah, and no one knows his burial place to this day. Burial means concealment. The revival of the dead is the disclosure. The reason why Moses disappeared and was buried outside the land is because of the domination of the Mishnah in the world. This is why no one knows his burial place to that day of the end of correction. Then, upon the revival of the dead, Moses with the two Messiahs will appear.
His burial, the concealment of Moses’ soul, comes from the Mishnah, who governs the queen, who is called Kabbalah  for Moses, and she is Malchut, and the queen is separated from her husband. This is why it is written, “For three things the earth quakes,” meaning Malchut, Nukva de ZA, the earth. “For a servant who reigns,” Matat. A maidservant is the Mishnah, for the verse, “And a handmaid that is heir to her mistress,” relates to the Mishnah, Matat’s wife. “And a villain when he is filled with bread” is the mixed multitude, “A villain and unwise people,” for the verse, “And a villain when he is filled with bread,” applies to the mixed multitude, who are called “A villain and unwise people.”
And the Lord God Formed Every Beast of the Field
274) “And out of the ground the Lord God formed every beast of the field and every bird of the sky.” Woe unto people for they are sealed hearted and closed of eyes. They do not look in the secrets of Torah or know that the words “Beast of the field and bird of the sky” imply the peoples of the earth. And even those who were rewarded with a living Nefesh, as long as they are not rewarded with a living Ruach they are of no help to Divinity during the exile, and they are of no help to Moses, who is with Divinity, for whenever Divinity was exiled, Moses did not move from her.
275) Rabbi Elazar said, “Who placed man’s works in Israel and in Moses? After all, the writings speak of Adam, so how do you take the works from Adam HaRishon to place them over Moses and Israel?” Rabbi Shimon said to him, “My son, that you should say so? Did you not learn the verse, ‘Saying the end in the beginning,’ that in the beginning of creation, the deeds that are at the end of time, at the end of correction, are implied at the beginning of creation?”
276) This is why Moses did not die, for he is with Divinity in exile, and he is called “man.” It is written about him in the last exile, “But for Adam He did not find a help.” Rather, they are all against him. “But for Adam He did not find a help made against him” is written about the middle pillar, ZA, for whom there was no one to help bring Divinity out of exile. It is written, “And he looked this way and that way, and saw that there was no one.” Moses is in his very Behina, like the middle pillar, and it is written about him, “But for Adam He did not find a help made against him,” as in the middle pillar.
277) When he did not find help, it is written, “And the Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall upon the man, and he slept.” “The Lord God” is AVI. Sleep is exile, as it is written about the exile, “And sleep fell upon Abram.” He cast sleep on Moses and he slept, and sleep is but exile because during sleep, the Mochin depart. Also, in the exile, the Daat  depart from Israel. This is why sleep is but exile. “And He took one of his ribs.” From whose ribs did He take? From those maidens of the queen. AVI took one of them, and she is considered Laban , and it is written about her, “As beautiful as the moon .”
Explanation: For herself, Malchut is unfit for Mochin, for she was restricted in Tzimtzum Aleph to not receive any Ohr Yashar into her. Her entire correction is through her ascent and Hitkalelut with Rachamim, Bina, AVI. However, in the future, at the end of correction, the correction of Moses and the two Messiahs, she will correct herself and be fit for receiving Ohr Yashar, and she will not need to be mitigated in Bina. Hence, there are two forms of construction for Divinity: 1) before the end of correction, through the mitigation upon her ascent to AVI. This is the middle pillar for ZA. 2) At the end of correction, in her own essence. This concerns Moses.
Because of her, it is written in the last exile, “But for Adam He did not find a help,” for the correction of Moses and the two Messiahs, since even after her Hitkalelut in Bina, she will receive only the first nine from her, but her own Behina, her Malchut, remains uncorrected. This is what the last exile is about, and this is why it was said about her, “But for Adam He did not find a help,” but rather they are all against him. It is written about that time, “And the Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall upon the man.” There is no sleep but exile because since he did not find help to correct her, she was sentenced to the last exile whose correction is by Moses.
And before the end of correction, which is through a correction on Malchut, the correction is done by the middle pillar. The middle pillar, ZA, had no one to help him bring Divinity out of exile, that is, from the first three exiles prior to the last exile, because the correction is through the middle pillar.
The Zohar gradually details before us the two corrections, the correction of the middle pillar, and the correction of Moses. It is written, “And He took one of his ribs,” since the seven Sefirot of Malchut, who received from AVI during her Katnut, are called “maidens.” It was said that AVI took one of them, which is Hesed, since Hesed is considered the white color, and it is written about her, “As beautiful as the moon,” for by the structure of Gadlut of AVI to complement with her the missing Malchut de Malchut, she becomes as beautiful as the moon.
“And closed up the flesh in her stead,” with Moses’ flesh, of whom it is written, “For he is also flesh,” since Beshegam  is Moshe  in Gematria. Hence, the flesh, too, which is said here, is the flesh of Moses, Gevura, by whom Malchut was completed in her left line. Moses’ flesh is red. It is written about it, “The face of Moses is as the face of the sun.” That is, as the sun tends toward red, Moses’ flesh was red, upper Gevura de Ima, since Gevurot de Ima are regarded as being of red color. This is why it is written, “As beautiful as the moon,” since her right line, from the side of the maiden, is considered white color. It is also written, “As pure as the sun,” meaning her left line, on the part of Moses’ red flesh.
278) “And closed up the flesh.” By that they wished to protect it from the outer ones, since “closed” means protection because the outer ones are chased away through the holy Gevura of the red flesh of Moses.
Another interpretation to the word, “And closed” is closing, making a frame through Moses’ red flesh, in which the queen, Malchut, is closed during the six work days, and only on the Sabbath day does it open.
And the Lord God Built the Rib
279) “And the Lord God built the rib” is an indication of the matter of levirate marriage, of which we learn that since he did not build, he shall not build. It is written, “Who does not build his brother’s house.” They learned from this verse that since he did not build, he shall not build. But with the Creator, although He did not build Divinity during the exile, He can still redeem her because it is written about Him, “And the Lord God built,” meaning AVI built Divinity for Him. And since He Himself did not build her, it cannot be said about Him, “Since He did not build, He shall not build.”
It is written, “The Lord, builder of Jerusalem.” Divinity, who is called Jerusalem, is built from the four letters HaVaYaH . It is so because the Vav de HaVaYaH, ZA, is the son of Yod-Hey de HaVaYaH, who are AVI. It is written about them, “And the Lord God built the rib,” which He took from the man, the middle line, ZA. “And brought her to the man,” meaning He brought him to the rib that He took from the bottom Hey de HaVaYaH, His maiden, Malchut de ZA himself, and not Malchut de Malchut. Thus, Jerusalem is built through the four letters HaVaYaH, for the primary builders are Yod-Hey, AVI, and the rib that is built is the bottom Hey, Malchut of the Vav de HaVaYaH, who is ZA, for the Vav.
280) It was said about Malchut de Malchut, who is not in the building of Jerusalem, “And will be for her a wall of fire round about.” She becomes a wall of fire around Jerusalem to keep from the mixed multitude. At the end of correction, the Creator will bring her down built up, as it is written, “The built up Jerusalem.” For this reason, on this mountain, in Malchut de Malchut, where the Temple will be built by the Creator, it will exist for generations and for all eternity. It was said about it, “The glory of this last house will be greater than the first,” since the first house was built by a man, Solomon, and the last house was built by the Creator. This is why it is written, “If the Lord does not build a house, those who built it labor in vain,” since the first and second Temples, which were not built by the Creator, were unsustainable, and their builders labored in vain.
The inner meaning of the words: It is known that the Emanator started creation and established creation in a way that the children of Israel could finish it, as we learn, “You are in partnership with Me, I started creation and you finish it.” The Emanator corrected Malchut only in the first nine in her. But He handed over to Israel the correction of Malchut de Malchut, to correct her through work and keeping of the first nine. Therefore, the whole of Israel’s work before the end of correction is only in Malchut’s first nine, which is considered the sorting of the 288 sparks that were corrected by the Emanator.
The two Temples above, the first Hey and the bottom Hey—and also below—were built in this manner. This is why they are considered to have been built by people, through the work of people, who were assigned with completing creation. And since the last 32 sparks belong to Malchut de Malchut, they have not been corrected yet. Thus, from them come the Sitra Achra and the mixed multitude, which make Israel sin. This is why the two Temples were ruined.
However, once the children of Israel sort out all 288 sparks that exist due to the breaking of the vessels, the Creator Himself will sort the last 32 sparks from Malchut de Malchut, which are called “the stony heart,” as it is written, “And I will remove the stony heart from your flesh.” At that time Malchut de Malchut, the last Temple, will be established. It is written, “If the Lord does not build a house,” meaning prior to the end of correction, when the work was given to people, and by which the two Temples were built, “Those who built it labor in vain” because they were ruined. But after the people complete the correction to which they are assigned, the Creator will bring down the built up Jerusalem, Malchut de Malchut, and the built up Temple—the interior of Malchut de Malchut. At that time it will be an eternal structure, for all eternity.
281) It is written of the future correction through Moses and the two Messiahs, “And the Lord God built the rib.” It is as it is written, “And to the second side  of the tabernacle,” since two sides are the primary ones in the tabernacle, in Malchut, extending from the two points in her: one side from Midat ha Rachamim, and the other side from Midat ha Din. “And the Lord God built the rib” that is said in the correction of Moses, is the second side of the tabernacle, extending from the point of Midat ha Din, her own Behina, Malchut de Malchut. But the rib  that is said in the correction of the middle pillar, is the side that extends from the point of Midat ha Rachamim, which includes her first nine.
A side on the part of extending Hesed is white, and it is called “moon”  after the light of Hesed in her. “And closed up the flesh in her stead” is red flesh, the light of Gevura, since the upper Gevura de Bina is considered red. Nukva consists of both red and white, HG. At that time it is said of Malchut, “His left is under my head,” meaning red flesh, Gevura, “And his right shall embrace me,” the white light of Hesed, who is called a “rib” .
282) “And the man said, ‘This is now a bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh.’” This was said about Divinity, who was a maiden engaged to the middle line, ZA. It was said about her, “This time, I know she is a bone of my bones and a flesh of my flesh,” since before Divinity is fit for a Zivug with ZA, she is called “an engaged maiden.” Once she is fit for his Zivug, she is called “a woman.” Hence, once she was built by AVI and became fit for a Zivug, he said, “This time.” “This shall be called ‘a woman,’” as she is built by the upper one, Ima, the first Hey de HaVaYaH, “Because she was taken out of Man,” from Aba, Yod de HaVaYaH.
This means according to the correction of the Nukva through the middle pillar prior to the end of correction, which is through the building of AVI. Also, the words are made clear in relation to the correction of Moses, who is in the form of the middle pillar of the souls below in BYA.
283) At that time each of Israel will be rewarded with his mate, as it is written, “And I will give you a new heart and a new spirit.” In truth, Israel extend from Malchut. But because the world could not persist, He associated Midat ha Rachamim with her, Bina. It therefore follows that all the females of the souls of Israel extend from Bina, Midat ha Rachamim, since Malchut de Midat ha Din was concealed. Thus, Israel do not have their real mate. But at the end of correction, when Malchut herself is corrected and no longer needs the association of Bina, the females of the souls of Israel will be from Malchut herself, who is their real mate.
It is written, “And your sons and your daughters shall prophesy.” These are new souls that are destined to be in Israel, as we learn that the Messiah Son of David does not come until the conclusion of all the souls that are in the body, meaning the old souls, and then the new souls will come. It is so because all the souls in the world were included in the soul of Adam HaRishon, as we learn, “Where was your ephah (measure of grain ca.40kgs) in Adam HaRishon?” And when he sinned with the tree of knowledge, the souls were blemished. They incarnate through all the generations until they receive their own correction and then will be the end of correction. At that time Israel will draw new souls that have not been included in the Guf of Adam HaRishon, and it is written about those souls, “And your sons and your daughters shall prophesy.”
284) At that time the mixed multitude will be removed from the world, and then it will be said of Israel and of Moses, “Each with his mate, and they were both naked, the man and his wife, and they were not ashamed.” That is, they will not need clothes to cover the nakedness because the nakedness, who are the mixed multitude that caused the exile in the world, will be removed.
Moses’ Hevel
285) It is written about the mixed multitude, “And the serpent was cunning,” since the serpent was cunning to do evil more than all the animals, who are the idol-worshipping nations of the world. The mixed multitude are the children of the primordial serpent who seduced Eve with the tree of knowledge, and the mixed multitude were the filth that the serpent cast in Eve. The mixed multitude that mingled with the souls to which Eve gave birth are regarded as filth in regard to the souls. Out of that filth, which are the mixed multitude, came forth Cain. This is why he killed Abel, the shepherd, of whom it is written, “For he is also flesh.” “Also” is Abel; “Also” is certainly Moses, and he killed him.
That is, “Also,” in Gematria, is Moses, and Moses is an incarnation of the soul of Abel. It follows that “Also” implies Abel and Moses. This is why Abel was a shepherd like Moses, and Cain—who killed him—it follows that he killed Moses. He did that because of the mixed multitude that was mixed in his soul. He was also Adam’s firstborn son, hence the filth was mixed in Cain’s soul, and not in Abel’s soul, since Cain was the firstborn son, who went out first after the sin of the tree of knowledge. This is why all of the filth of the serpent came out in him.
286) For this reason, because Moses wished to cover his father’s nakedness, he took Jethro’s daughter for his wife, as it is written about him, “And the children of the Kenite, Moses' father-in-law.” Jethro is called Kenite because he parted from Cain, as it is written, “And Heber the Kenite parted from Cain.” Hence, although Cain killed Abel, who is Moses, Moses still returned to correct Cain, to whom the mixed multitude was attached, the nakedness of Adam HaRishon, due to the sin of the tree of knowledge. Moses wished to erase that filth, which is the nakedness of his father, Adam HaRishon. This is why he took Jethro’s daughter for a wife, since Jethro was an incarnation of Cain, for which he was called Kenite. By taking his daughter he corrected him and repelled the filth from him, which is the mixed multitude.
And once he separated the mixed multitude from Cain’s soul, he wished to make them repent, to cover the nakedness of his father, Adam HaRishon. The Creator adds a good thought to an act, and the Creator said to Moses, “Beware of them, of that evil race, and I will conjoin your good thought—of wanting to make them repent—to an act.” Those mixed multitude are the forces of separation that were in the tree of knowledge, for which the Creator warned him, as it is written, “But of the tree of knowledge of good and evil you shall not eat.” They are also the forces of separation in the sins of Moses and Israel.
287) Because of the mixed multitude, Israel were exiled and expelled from their land, as it is written, “And He drove out the man.” “The man” implies Israel. Moses was expelled from his place due to the mixed multitude because he did not keep from them as the Creator had warned him, but instead wished to bring them closer to Kedusha. This is why he was not rewarded with entering the land of Israel and was buried outside the land, for because of them he broke the Creator’s words and sinned with the rock that he struck, since He told him, “And speak to the rock,” but he struck the rock. It is the mixed multitude who caused him that.
This is why the Creator adds a good thought to an act, since Moses would not receive the mixed multitude, to place in them the token of the covenant, except to cover his father’s nakedness. This is why the Creator conjoined his good thought to an act. In return for that, the Creator told him, “And I will make of you a nation greater and mightier than they.” This came true in Moses, that the children of Rehavia multiplied above, meaning they multiplied and became more than 600,000.
The Creator said about the mixed multitude, “He who had sinned unto Me, I will blot him out of My book,” for they are the descendants of Amalek, of whom it is written, “Blot out the memory of Amalek.” The mixed multitude also caused Israel to sin with the calf and the first two tablets of the testimony broke.
288) The verse, “And the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they were naked” also implies Israel. In the enslavement in Egypt, Israel knew that they were naked, for they were without the Torah there. It was said about them in the last exile, “And you were naked and bare,” since by the Torah and Mitzvot, Israel are rewarded with clothes for their souls. When they were without the Torah in the exile in Egypt, as well as in the last exile, their souls are necessarily naked, without any clothes.
Because of that, Job said “naked” twice, about the two exiles: “I came out of my mother’s womb naked, and naked I shall return there.” “I came out ... naked” implies the exile in Egypt, and “Naked I shall return there” implies the last exile. That which was named “Moses” became in the eyes of the mixed multitude “there” and “mocked.” This is why Job said, “I shall return there.” It implies that Moses is destined to be turned in the last exile among the mixed multitude from the name Moses  to There . That is, Moses walks among them to there. Job said about it, “The Lord gave,” meaning He gave the Torah, “And the Lord has taken away,” meaning He took her once more in the last exile and she became hidden from Israel, “Blessed be the name of the Lord.”
289) When the two tablets of the Torah broke, and the oral Torah was concealed, it was said about Israel, “And they sewed fig-leaves.” They were covered with several Klipot of the mixed multitude because they became naked  of Torah and covered themselves so their nakedness would not be revealed, the places where the Klipot have a grip. Their cover is the edges of the Tzitzit .
It is written on the straps of the Tefillin, “And the Lord God made for Adam and for his wife garments of skins, and clothed them.” However, regarding the Tzitzit, it was said, “And they sewed fig-leaves.” It is so because two kinds of covers were mentioned for covering their nakedness, which came to them through the tree of knowledge: 1) the covers that they made by themselves, the fig-leaves, 2) the covers that the Creator made for them, the garments of skin.
Therefore, when the writings imply to Israel after the breaking of the tablets, The Zohar says that the cover of the fig-leaves implies the covering of the edges of the Tzitzit, which are instruments of Mitzva, thrown away after the doing of the Mitzva because there is no Kedusha in them at all. But the covering of garments of skin implies the straps of the Tefillin, which are instruments of Kedusha that are concealed, and there is Kedusha in them even after their doing of the Mitzva.
“And made themselves girdles,” as it is written, “Gird Your sword on the thigh, O Mighty One.” This is the Shema reading, since the Shema reading is as a sword toward the outer ones, and it is girded at the thigh. It is said about it in the Shema reading, “The high praises of God in their mouth, and a double-edged sword in their hand.” The Shema reading, which is called by the mouth, is like a sword. This is why it says about it, “And made themselves girdles.”
Bad Mixtures
290) “And they heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the garden” indicates Israel when they came near for the reception of the Torah on Mount Sinai, as it is written, “Has any people heard the voice of God speaking from the midst of the fire, as you have heard it, and survived?” But the mixed multitude could not hear the voice of God and died. Those of the mixed multitude who remained, who did not die, later said to Moses, “And let not God speak with us, lest we die.” They caused forgetfulness of the Torah by making Israel sin with the calf. Those mixed multitude are the nations of the earth, of whom it is written, “Cursed is he who lies with any beast,” since they are on the part of the serpent, of whom it is said, “Cursed are you more than all beast.”
291) But there are several bad mixtures in Israel called “beasts” and “animals.” But there is mixture on the part of the serpent, and there is mixture of the part of the idol-worshipping nations of the world, who are like animals and beasts of the field. And there is also mixed multitude on the part of the harm-doers, who are the souls of the wicked because the souls of the wicked are really the harm-doers of the world. There is also mixed multitude of demons and spirits and Lilit.
They are all mingled with Israel. Yet, there is none so cursed among them as Amalek, who is the evil serpent and another god. He is the one who discloses all the incest in the world, meaning he is the root of the Klipa that yields incest in the world. He is a murderer, from whom murdering extends to the world. His mate is the potion of death of idol-worship. Thus, the three grave transgressions—incest, bloodshed, and idol-worship—extend from the Klipa of Amalek, who is the serpent and who is another god.
They are all considered SAM. But there are many kinds of SAM, and they are not all the same. But this SAM, on the part of the serpent, is the most cursed.
292) “And the Lord God called to the man, and said to him, ‘Where are you?’” In the verse, “And said to him, ‘Where are you?’” the Creator implies Adam HaRishon, that the Temple was destined to be ruined and that it would be mourned, “How,” as it is written, “How lonely sits...” . It is so because Eicha has the letters Aleph-Yod Chaf-Hey, where Chaf-Hey is the name of Divinity who was at the Temple, and Aleph-Yod means “where,” as it is written, “Where is your brother Abel?” Hence, after the ruin, it said about Divinity, Eicha , where is Divinity now, who is called Chaf-Hey.
In the future, the Creator will obliterate every kind of evil from the world, as it is written, “He shall swallow up death forever.” Death is the root of all evil. When death is cancelled, all evil will be cancelled and everything will return to its place as prior to the sin of the tree of knowledge from which came death and every kind of evil, as it is written, “In that day the Lord will be one and His name, One.”
The Correction of the Lower World from the Upper World
293) Every Shlomo  that is said in The Song of Songs means a king that Shalom  is his, ZA. If we say only “king,” and not King Solomon, it means Nukva de ZA, Malchut. The lower king is included in the upper king, and the thing is that the lower one inherits the upper one, and both became as one.
What separates the king that peace is his from the Nukva—just, “the king”—is that the lower king, Nukva, exists only when she rises to the upper king, Bina, since the Nukva cannot receive Mochin by herself. Rather, through the Nukva’s ascent to Bina, the lower one, Nukva, inherits the upper one, Bina, since the mother lends her clothes to her daughter and adorns her with her adornments. Therefore, Bina—as well as ZA, who extends from Bina—are called by the name, “the king that peace is his.” Thus, all the peace of the Nukva, her Kelim and Mochin, extend from Bina and ZA because through Nukva’s ascent to Bina, Bina and Nukva became as one and Nukva can receive the same Mochin as Bina.
Then Nukva is called “house,” since by inheriting the Mochin of illumination of Hochma from Bina, she is called “a house,” as it is written, “In wisdom  shall a house be built.” This implies that the Nukva is not called “a house” unless when she has Hochma. It is written, “King Solomon made himself a palanquin.” A palanquin is the correction of the lower world, the Nukva, from the upper world, Bina. That is, when matters relate to the Nukva in her correction through Bina, she is called “a palanquin.”
294) Until the Creator created the world, His name was hidden in it, and He and His name that is hidden in it were one. His name is Malchut, who—prior to creation—was included and hidden in Ein Sof, without any disclosure or recognition. At that time He and His name that is hidden in it were one. Nothing was revealed until He wished to create the world. He was inscribing and building worlds, but they were unsustainable and were ruined. That is, the worlds that came out of Malchut at the time of Tzimtzum Aleph—called “worlds of Tohu,” in whom there was the breaking of the vessels, which is the ruin of these worlds.
We learn about them that in the beginning, the world was created in Midat ha Din, Malchut de Tzimtzum Aleph, who is called Midat ha Din. He saw that the world did not exist—that they were ruined—He associated with it Midat ha Rachamim. That is, the Creator, Bina, was enveloped in an envelope of light and created the world, meaning elevated the Malchut to her. Because of it, her light diminished into VAK, called “enveloped light,” for then Midat ha Din, Malchut was associated with Midat ha Rachamim, Bina, by which the world existed.
295) Out of that enveloped light He brought forth great and high cedars, out of that upper brightness. Afterwards He returned and extended GAR to the abovementioned enveloped light, and placed His Merkava over 22 inscribed letters, which are ZON, since the letters ELEH de Bina, which descend during Katnut from her to ZON, and which Bina returns to her during Gadlut, are considered a Merkava  that travels here and there. He placed His Merkava over 22 letters, over ZON in Katnut, and later, in Gadlut, ZON were engraved in ten utterances, meaning Mochin de GAR. At that time they were reconciled and achieved their desirable correction.
It is written, “King Solomon made himself a palanquin from the cedars of Lebanon.” It is also written, “The cedars that He had planted.” Hochma is called “white,” and Bina is called “Lebanon.” The palanquin that Solomon made, the Nukva, he made for himself from the Kelim of Bina, Lebanon, and her Sefirot are also the cedars of Lebanon. The Nukva was built out of these cedars.
296) “King Solomon made himself...” The word “himself” is redundant. The Zohar interprets “himself” as “for himself,” that King Solomon, ZA in Mochin de Bina, made the palanquin for himself, for his own correction, that he first corrected himself with the palanquin.
“For himself,” to show His high glory, to give His Mochin from the high glory, Bina, to the palanquin, Malchut. “For himself,” to announce, “He is one and His name, ‘One,’” to bring on the end of correction, as it is written, “In that day, the Lord will be one, and His name, ‘One.’” It is written about that time, “And they will know that it is You alone whose name is the ‘Lord.’”
297) The palaces, Mochin, are obtained upon the arrival of the Zivug de Hakaa in Malchut de Bina. Dripping to that side of above is dripping to the right. Leaning to the left means descending. When he extends the Mochin from below upward, it is right, Netzah. When he leans to the left, Hod, the illumination of Mochin descends from above downward. However, their illumination does not extend downward from Netzah. He also extends the Mochin to the four angles, which are 12, since each angle consists of three Behinot. Malchut de Bina expands upward and downward, and into four angles, to be one high river.
That is, Malchut de Bina gives all those Mochin that came out in Bina to ZA. Through them, ZA becomes one high river, as it is written, “And a river,” ZA, “came out of Eden,” Bina. These Mochin are 24 Behinot, since 12 Behinot are included in four angles, HB TM, from Netzah, meaning 12 Behinot from below upward. There are also HB TM from Hod, meaning 12 Behinot from above downward, making 24 Behinot. All of them become one high river, Mochin to the ZA, which is “And a river came out of Eden.”
298) ZA is the upper river. It descends and gives Mochin below to Malchut, making her the great sea, as it is written, “All the rivers go to the sea,” since Malchut collects everything and sucks them within her. It is so because those Mochin, which are 24 Behinot, come out inside the Bina, who is called “river,” as it is written, “He will drink from the brook on the way,” ZA, “therefore he will lift up the head,” GAR, which are called Rosh . This is why the 24 Behinot of Mochin are called “rivers” , and ZA drinks those rivers and gives them to Malchut, as it is written, “All the rivers go to the sea,” since through the rivers that she receives from ZA, Malchut becomes the great sea.
It is written, “I am a sand-lily of the Sharon.” Only the place near the great sea, which sucks in all the waters of the world, is called “The Sharon.” That is, “Sharon” comes from the word “He will see over men,” meaning seeing, Mochin de Hochma. For this reason, when Malchut has Mochin de Hochma, she is called “The sand-lily of the Sharon.” Malchut is called Sharon only when she is near the great sea, when she has the rivers of Bina, the Mochin de Hochma, for then she sucks into her all the waters of Bina, who is called “world,” which are all 24 rivers that he brings forth and sucks into him, and they illuminate in one another in certain ways.
The elicitation of the Mochin is in three points—Holam, Shuruk, Hirik. He brings forth the point of Holam. At that time, AA, brings Bina out of the Rosh, and ZA brings Malchut out of Atzilut, and she becomes VAK without a Rosh, the right line. “Sucks within him” is the point of Shuruk, when Bina returns to Rosh AA and Malchut returns to Atzilut, receiving the Mochin de Hochma, the left line, as the reception of these Mochin is called “sucking.”
“They illuminate in one another in certain ways” means that it is the point of Hirik, the elicitation of the level of Hassadim that clothes the two lines—right and left—in one another. This is the meaning of the middle line, when they illuminate in one another. The right line that extends from the Holam receives the GAR from the left line, which extends from Shuruk. Also, the left line receives the Hassadim from the right line, and there is Hochma and Hassadim in the right line, and Hochma and Hassadim in the left line, by which the Mochin are completed.
Then it is written about them, “In wisdom  shall a house be built,” to which the Bet of Beresheet implies, since once the Hochma clothed in Hassadim, Bina is called “a house.” Malchut, too, is called “a house,” to which the Bet of Beresheet implies, since Bet is called Bait  The upper Temple , Bina, was built with Hochma, and the lower house , Malchut, was also built with Hochma. However, the great and high Temple, Bina, is the settling of the world, for the Mochin are not for herself but for the settling of ZON, who is called “world,” and the lower Temple is plainly, “a king,” Malchut.
299) “And the king,” Malchut, “shall rejoice in the” upper “God,” Bina, to grip Him under His head and bring him near with joy so the two of them are one, as it is written, “His left is under my head and his right shall embrace me” is said about the Mochin de Bina received by Malchut through ZA. This clarifies the words, “And the king shall rejoice in God.” Malchut will rejoice in Bina, in the upper Elokim, as she is gripped to her under her head, giving her Mochin that become Rosh for Malchut, and giving her Hassadim to bring her closer, to unite into one with her, since then Malchut rises and clothes Bina, and the two of them become one.
“And the king shall rejoice in God,” the joy in the light that He emitted. It explains the words by order of the elicitation of the Mochin in three points—Holam, Shuruk, Hirik—and the joy is the joy of the light that He elicited at the point of Holam. And although through this elicitation she becomes only VAK without a Rosh, through that elicitation of the Bina, Malchut becomes fit to receive all the Mochin de Bina. Were it not for this elicitation, Malchut would not be fit to receive Mochin. This is why the text says about this elicitation, “And the king shall rejoice in God.” The joy is because one hidden and concealed trail came out, inserting two trails within it, two that are one.
Once Malchut included and mitigated in Bina, she was established in two points, called Man’ula  and Miftacha , in her own point and in the point of Bina. However, her own Behina , Man’ula, which has no Zivug, was concealed in her and is not at all apparent in her. Rather, only the point of Bina, Miftacha, on which all the Mochin are elicited, is revealed in her, which is why she is fit for Mochin. This is the meaning of the elicitation of one trail, in Miftacha.
He inserted two trails in her—a trail of Miftacha and a trail of Man’ula—but they were established in two that are one, meaning that only one is apparent, the Miftacha. This is why the world, Malchut, was established in complete Mochin, since later, all the Mochin de Gadlut later come out on the Miftacha, extended from Bina. If the other trail had been apparent in her, the Man’ula, she would not be able to receive any Mochin. This is why it was said about that exit through the trail of Miftacha, “And the king shall rejoice in God.”
300) “And the king shall rejoice in God.” The lower world will rejoice in the upper, hidden world. That world, which gives life to all, is called “the life of the king.” When Bina returns to Rosh AA, she is regarded as the point of Shuruk. At that time she becomes Hochma in him, and then she is called Elokim, deep and hidden in name, and the light of Hochma is called “light of Haya,” as it is written, “And wisdom  shall sustain its owner.” It is written, “And the king shall rejoice in God,” meaning that the lower world will rejoice in the upper, hidden world when Bina is called “a deep and hidden world.” During her ascent to Rosh AA, she becomes Hochma at the point of Shuruk, and then Bina sends life, Mochin de Hochma, to all the degrees. These Mochin are called “the life of the king.”
This does not mean that now she gives life to all, for now she is devoid of Hassadim and the lower ones cannot receive anything from her without the clothing of Hassadim, for this is why she is now called “the hidden world.” Rather, it means that afterwards she clothes that light of Hochma in light of Hassadim at the point of Hirik, and from there she gives the Hochma, called “life,” to all the degrees.
The Mochin of the point of Shuruk are the core of the house, since Malchut is not called “house,” except after Mochin de Hochma, as it is written, “In wisdom  shall a house be built.” Hence, the Mochin de Shuruk, Hochma, are the core of the house, but the Mochin are still hidden due to lack of Hassadim. For this reason, it is considered that the house is still not inhabited. Also, she is the core of the house because afterwards illumination of Hochma—which is the core of the house—will be drawn from here.
That house builds the house of the world, ZON, and builds the world, which are ZON. The point of Hirik is the level of Hassadim, in which the Hochma clothes so they can clothe in the lower ones, ZON, called “world.” That house, the core of the house of the point of Shuruk, builds the house of the world, dresses in Hassadim, and is regarded as building a settled house for the world, ZON, for whenever “building” is mentioned, it means “in light of Hassadim,” extending from GAR de Bina, which are as it is written, “For He desires mercy .”
That is, the core of the house, Hochma, dresses in Hassadim of the point of Hirik, by which he builds a house for ZON for settling, clothing Hochma in Hassadim. Afterwards she gives them to ZON when they are clothed in one another, and then ZON—called “world”—are built in order to inhabit the house, and the Mochin are sufficiently complemented.
It is as it is written, “In the beginning God created,” where “In the beginning ” has the letters of Bait  Resheet . Resheet is Hochma, when Malchut collects all the Mochin into her and becomes the great sea, drawing all the Mochin at the point of Shuruk. Then Malchut is called Resheet. When Resheet, Hochma, dresses in Hassadim, she is called Bait Resheet, for now she is a house for settling. This is “In the beginning God created.”
301) The waters of the congealed sea, Malchut, suck all the waters of the world and gather them into it. The waters walk and roam in it here and there, and are sucked into it. It comes out and is done in Malchut from the upper one, from Bina, as it is written, “Out of whose abdomen came forth the ice?” From Bina, who is called MI , the ice, Malchut, came forth and became the congealed sea. Its waters congeal in it so it may suck other waters, for it is the nature of congealed water that many hollowed vents are made in them. Hence, if you pour water over them, the ice swallows and receives them. Thus, by congealing, the waters become a receptacle to receive other waters.
The Zohar explains the necessity of clothing Hochma in Hassadim. It says, “The waters of the congealed sea, Malchut, suck all the waters of the world and gather them into it. The waters walk and roam in it here and there, and are sucked into it.” It is so because when Malchut receives the Hochma at the point of Shuruk, and she is called “sea,” she becomes the congealed sea. The lights congeal and become hidden within them and are not imparted from her outwards. A correction is made on that, as long as Hochma is without Hassadim, for she harms the lower ones. Hence, the lights are congealed within her and are not imparted to the lower ones.
Malchut is the congealed sea while her lights draw all the lights of the upper world, Bina, and collect them into her, when Bina returns to Rosh de AA and becomes Hochma. The waters walk and roam in it here and there, and are sucked into it. Since they are not imparted from her outwards, the waters walk and roam in it here and there, and by that they are sucked in her.
He says below that through the Southern wind, which is Hassadim extended through the point of Hirik, the ice in her melts and she returns to being liquid and gives to the lower ones. At that time, once she is under the domination of the Southern wind, Malchut can no longer receive Hochma except for that light of Hochma she had received before when she was frozen. Now it dresses in the light of Hassadim that she receives from the south. This is why it is considered that the light of Hochma goes here and there. That is, first it goes and comes to Malchut, and then—through the Southern wind—it exits her once more and comes to its root. But in the meantime Malchut sucks the light of Hochma that passed within her.
The waters of Hochma go and roam here and there because first they come and freeze within her, and then come out of her again by the Southern wind. In the meantime they are sucked in her because the light of Hochma is sucked in her. She absorbs it within her and it remains in her always, since the time when she was frozen with it.
He says, “It comes out and is done in Malchut from the upper one.” The matter of congealing and the ice extends to Malchut from the upper one, from Bina, as it is written, “Out of whose,” Bina, called MI, “abdomen came forth the ice?”
302) The waters of that ice of the holy sea will not leak unless when the force of the south, the right, comes out and takes it with it. Then the waters that were congealed from the north, the left, melt and are drawn by the south, imparting to the lower ones. “The force of the south” means the point of Hirik, the level of Hassadim that emerges on Masach de Behina Aleph. Since he subdues the Hassadim of the right line, south, and empowers it over the left, north, it is regarded as the force of the south. At that time the force of the south reaches the ice that extends from the north, the left line, and takes it with it, including it within it. And since the left line is included in the right, the ice promptly melts and the lights extend to the lower ones.
It is so because the waters congeal from the north, the left line. From the south, the right line, the waters melt and pour down to the lower ones, to water all the animals of the field, the degrees outside of Atzilut, in BYA. Those in BYA are called Mounts of Batter , mountains of separation, since it is written about BYA, “And from there it parted.” They will all be watered when the south begins to bond with it. At that time the waters extend and by that upper force that extends from the south they will all be in glory and joy.
303) When the thought comes up and arrives in a desire from the most hidden of all that is hidden, AA, a river extends from the thought. Bina is called “a thought.” Malchut is called “desire.” The river that stretches out of the thought are the three letters ELEH that came out of the thought that is called Elokim.
When Bina de AA, the thought, received Malchut de AA within her, meaning the desire, and was included in her, a river extended and parted from Bina, meaning the three letters ELEH de Elokim parted from Bina and extended down to ZON. Only the two letters MI of the name Elokim remained in Bina.
When they approach each other, when the river ELEH approaches the letters MI in the thought once again, he is complemented once again in the name Elokim through a single trail that is not known above or below. Here is where the beginning of everything is made. During Gadlut, when the illumination of AB SAG de AK lowers the Malchut from the thought to her place once again, the letters ELEH return to the thought and the name Elokim is completed in her as before.
In Beresheet there are the letters Bet Resheet. Bet implies merely a king, Malchut, established and completed from Resheet, Bina, the thought, and Malchut and Bina are similar to one another. This is why they come together in the word Beresheet, where Bet is Malchut and Resheet is Bina.
304) “God created the heaven.” It means that He emitted a sound out of Him. Elokim, Bina, emanated and elicited the heaven, ZA, a voice. He is called “the voice of the Shofar .” The heaven, ZA, governs the earth by the Mochin called “life of the upper king.” The light of Hochma is called “life,” the upper king, Bina, who emanated the heaven. This is why these Mochin are called “the life of the upper king,” as it is written, “The Son of Yishai lives on the earth,” since the illumination of Hochma, called “life,” depends on the son of Yishai, the kingship of David, and through them he governed everything. Also, the earth, Malchut, receives from the heaven, as it is written, “God created the heaven and the earth.”
There are two Behinot of Malchut to ZA: 1) Malchut from Chazeh de ZA and above, the kingship of David, 2) Malchut from Chazeh and below, Rachel, Earth.
ZA, who is called “heaven,” gives those Mochin de Hochma—called “life of the upper king”—to the earth, the Nukva from Chazeh and below. However, they depend on the kingship of David, on Malchut from Chazeh and above, since the Zivug de ZA to receive the Mochin with the kingship of David—once they have been received in the kingship of David—gives them to the earth, the lower Nukva.
Life depends on the son of Yishai, on David’s kingship, since the Zivug to receive these Mochin from Bina is made in it. Afterwards it gives them to the earth. This is why the text says, “The son of Yishai lives on the earth,” to indicate that the life received by the earth, the lower Nukva de ZA, comes from the son of Yishai, the Nukva from Chazeh and above. The Vav that is added to the word “the,” as it is written, “And the earth,” is to empower and impart nourishments on the earth, to the lower Nukva, since this Vav of VeHaAretz  is the male in the Nukva, and she receives the imparting of nourishments from that male.
305) It is written, “The heaven.” She is the force of the whole of the 22 letters implied in Et , from Aleph through Tav, which Elokim—Bina—elicited and gave to the heaven, ZA. Et implies Nukva because Aleph-Tav is the whole of the 22 letters from Aleph to Tav, and letters are Kelim that depend only on the Nukva, since the male is the light and the Nukva is the Kelim.
“The heaven” is the Nukva from Chazeh and above in the Guf of ZA, which Bina emanated along with ZA, as it is written, “In the crown with which his mother has crowned him.” Nukva is a crown with which his mother, Bina, has crowned him. “And the heaven” is male and female, including them in one another and connecting them in one another so they exist together in those Mochin, called “the life of the king.” Merely “the king,” which is Nukva, will be nourished by ZA, who is called “heaven.”
“And the earth” indicates bonding of male and female who were engraved in inscribed letters, since the Nukva from Chazeh and above implied in the words, “the heaven,” is only the force of the 22 letters, which are not yet actual letters as they are from above the Chazeh. But the Nukva implied in the words, “And the earth” is actual 22 inscribed letters as they are from Chazeh and below. This is why it was said that they were engraved in inscribed letters in actual fact.
The life of the king are the Mochin of illumination of Hochma, extending from the heaven, ZA. The heaven extend them only to sustain the earth and all her multitudes. That is, ZA does not extend these Mochin for himself, as he is corrected in Mochin de Hassadim from the pure air of upper AVI. However, he extends them only for the Nukva from Chazeh and below and for all the souls extending from her.
306) The upper Elokim, Bina, made heaven and earth in Mochin of existence, the life of the king, and elicited them as one by the force of above, GAR de Bina, who are upper AVI, called “the beginning of everything.” That is, GAR de Bina, upper AVI, emanated the upper heaven and earth, the great ZON from Chazeh de ZON and above. Likewise, the upper secret, Bina, descended to her ZAT, YESHSUT, who made the lower heaven and earth, the small ZON, from Chazeh de ZON and below.
307) This whole matter is the Bet of Beresheet, which implies Bina. She is called Bet because there are Bet  worlds in Bina—upper AVI, called “the upper world,” and YESHSUT, called “the lower world.” They created worlds: the upper world of Bina created the upper world of ZON, and the lower world of Bina created the lower world, one such as the other, AVI such as YESHSUT. AVI created heaven and earth, the great ZON, and YESHSUT created heaven and earth, the small ZON.
Therefore, Bet implies that there are two worlds in Bina—AVI and YESHSUT. One elicited two worlds, the great ZON, and the other elicited two worlds, the small ZON. All of them came forth by the upper Resheet, Bina, who returned to Rosh AA, called “the upper Resheet.”
308) The difference between the Zivug of the upper world of Bina and the Zivug of the lower world of Bina is that the upper world descends to the lower world to emanate the lower world of ZON, the small ZON. It is filled by a Zivug from the upper light in the path of one degree that is on her, like the blocked, hidden, and concealed trail of above.
The Malchut that is Man’ula  operates in upper AVI from two Malchuts, Man’ula and Miftacha . She locks there the Zivug of illumination of Hochma so the Yod would not come out of Avir de AVI, hence AVI remain in pure Avir, in covered Hassadim. Therefore, the Man’ula is called “the blocked, hidden, and concealed trail.”
The Miftacha operates in YESHSUT, opening in them the Mochin of illumination of Hochma, and the Yod comes out of their Avir and they become light. For this reason, Malchut de YESHSUT is called a “path” or a “way,” since all the Mochin of illumination of Hochma appear in her. It was said that it is filled by a Zivug from the upper light in the path of one degree, the degree of Miftacha that is over the lower world, YESHSUT, who is in YESHSUT like the blocked, hidden, and concealed trails of above in AVI.
One of them is a narrow trail, in AVI, and one of them is a path, in YESHSUT. The one below is a path, as it is written, “And the path of the righteous is as the light of dawn, that shines more and more unto the perfect day.” The one above, AVI, is a narrow trail, as it is written, “A path that the eagle does not know.” That is, there is no Zivug there, called “knowing.” This is why it is written, “A path that the eagle does not know,” since it is unknown.
It is written, “Who makes a way in the sea,” meaning YESHSUT that were corrected in Malchut de Miftacha, called a “path.” “And a path in the mighty waters” means AVI, where Malchut de Man’ula—called “path” or “trail”—was established. It is so because the male of Man’ula is called a “trail,” and Nukva is called a “route.” It is written, “Your way is in the sea,” meaning YESHSUT, whose correction is in Malchut of the way. “And Your path in the great waters” is AVI, whose correction is in Malchut of the narrow trail. When the upper world of Bina is included in the lower world and she emanated the lower world of ZON, the small ZON were emanated in Miftacha, called “way” or “path.” Hence, they, too, receive illumination of Hochma like Bina’s lower world.
When the upper world of Bina—AVI, which are in Malchut de Man’ula, called a “trail” or a “path”—were filled in the Zivug of the upper light on their Malchut and were impregnated by the light, like a Nukva that is impregnated by the male, they emitted and begot two offspring as one, male and female, ZON. They are “heaven” and “earth,” like the upper world of Bina, AVI, since they, too, were established in Malchut de Man’ula, like them. This is why they are in covered Hassadim, as well.
It has been clarified that the difference between the upper heaven and earth, which came forth from Bina’s upper world, and the lower heaven and earth, which came forth from Bina’s lower world, is that the upper ones are only in covered Hassadim because they were established in Malchut de Man’ula, which is not known. The lower ones are in Hassadim disclosed in illumination of Hochma because they were established in Malchut de Miftacha which is known, a path, and it is written about her, “And the path of the righteous is as the light of dawn, that shines more and more unto the perfect day.”
309) The earth is nourished by the waters of the heaven, and their waters are thrown in it. That is, she receives from the heaven, ZA, both the nourishments for the sustenance of the earth, the Nukva, as well as the male waters for begetting the souls, like semen that is fired like a begetting arrow. However, the male is the upper one and Nukva is the lower one. The upper waters in the earth, which she received from the heaven, are males, and the lower waters in herself are females.
The lower waters are nourished by the male waters, the upper waters that she received from the heaven. The lower waters in the earth call the upper water in the heaven to give them what they need like a female that is open to receive from the male, and shoots lower water opposite the male upper water to beget souls. Likewise, the Nukva is nourished by the male because the female has nothing of her own. She receives from the male both the nourishments, the abundance for her sustenance, and the begetting of the souls.
This is why it is written, “And the earth,” with an added Vav  to the word Et , indicating the male in the land. There are male and female in heaven, considered the upper heaven and earth, and there is also male and female in the earth, considered lower heaven and earth.
310) It is written, “Raise your eyes on high and see who has created these.” Letters were engraved in the whole of the work of creation, both in the upper work, Bina, and in the lower work, Malchut. Afterwards the letters were inscribed and completed. Bina is called Elokim, whose five letters are KHB TM. When Malchut rose to Bina de Bina under the Hochma in her, Bina and TM in her departed from her and fell to ZON, leaving two Sefirot KH in Bina, which are the two letters MI of Elokim, and the three Sefirot—Bina and her TM that fell from her—are the three letters ELEH of Elokim. This is “Who  has created these .” “Created” means took out, and MI took out the letters ELEH outside of Bina. This exit is considered the engraving of the letters, which mean Kelim.
Afterwards Bina lowered Malchut to her place as before and returned the letters ELEH to her degree, where they rejoined the letters MI in her and the holy name Elokim  was completed once again. The returning of the letters ELEH to the name Elokim is regarded as inscribing of the letters, the completion of their form, since now they have become fit for reception of all the Mochin because by Malchut’s ascent to Bina, the letters ELEH descended outside of Bina. This is considered the engraving of the letters.
This engraving was done in both Bina and Malchut because as the letters ELEH descended from Bina, so they descended from all the degrees below Bina. Afterwards the letters were inscribed and completed. Then, when Bina returned the letters ELEH and the name Elokim was completed, the letters, which are the Kelim, were inscribed and completed. He calls it an “inscription” because the disclosure of the current Mochin is according to the engraving that was done before. This is why it is regarded as the form of the letters being engraved first. Afterwards the inscriptions were made inside the engravings in these inscriptions and were completed for their tasks.
The letters were engraved in the words, “In the beginning ... created,” meaning in the letters Bet in the words Beresheet and Barah . The two letters Bet imply the time of Katnut and the engraving that was made in Bina. The letters Aleph in the Elokim and in the word Et  is considered inscribing and completion of the letters.
Bet Resheet, certainly the Bet of Beresheet Barah, which took out. The Bet took the letters ELEH outside by the force of the upper world, Bina, called Elokim, which left the letters MI in her and took out the letters ELEH in her. The letter Bet is a female and the letter Aleph is a male. That is, the letter Bet indicates Katnut, VAK without a Rosh, considered a female, and the letter Aleph indicates Gadlut, obtainment of GAR, considered a male. It is so because a male indicates completeness and the female incompleteness. The letter Bet of Beresheet Barah indicates engraving of the letters, and the letter Aleph of Elokim Et indicates inscription and completion of the letters.
As the Bet of Beresheet took her out by the force of the upper one, the degree of Bina, who remained in VAK without a Rosh because she took the letters ELEH out, so Aleph of Elokim emanated the letters Aleph-Tav, which are all 22 letters, at the degree of Bina, since the word Et  contains Aleph Tav, indicating the 22 letters from Aleph to Tav. The Bet of Beresheet Barah indicates the engraving of the letters, the descent of the letters ELEH outwards, for which she remained with only the two letters MI, which are VAK. The Aleph indicates the completion of the letters, the return of the letters ELEH to the degree.
They joined the letters MI, and the name Elokim was completed, as it is written, Elokim Et. Once the name Elokim was completed, He emanated all 22 letters implied in the word Et from Aleph to Tav, which mean Kelim and Mochin de GAR like the 22 letters, which are the Kelim that suffice to clarify the completion of the Hochma. These Mochin that He emanated to the complete Bina, called Elokim, which are the whole of the 22 letters, were emanated inside Bina herself because as Beria, the engraving, was in Bina, called Resheet, the completion implied in Aleph was also made in Bina.
The words “The heaven,” with the letter Hey, indicates that Hey, Bina, which was completed, emanated the ZA, who is called “heaven,” giving him life and rooting him. Life means Mochin of illumination of Hochma because the light of Hochma is called “the light of Haya.” Rooting him means that ZA himself does not need illumination of Hochma because he is established in covered Hassadim, but these Mochin are rooted in him to impart them upon the Nukva. This is why it was said, “And to root him,” to make him a root for the Nukva.
311) “And the land...” The Vav  of “And the land,” which is ZA, emanated the earth, the Nukva, to give her nourishments, to correct her, and to give her all the needs that she deserves. Nourishments mean abundance, enough to sustain her, and to correct her, the correction of her Partzuf so she is face-to-face with him, and to give her all the needs that she deserves, meaning illumination of Hochma.
The Vav of “And the land” indicates that the Vav, ZA, took the word Et , which means the whole of the 22 letters from Aleph to Tav, and gave them to the earth, the Nukva. That is, that collective of all 22 letters that ZA received from Bina, as it is written, “The heaven,” he gave them to the Nukva, earth. “And the earth,” Nukva, included them within her, as it is written, “All the rivers go to the sea.” This is why it is written, “And the earth,” that the earth collected everything into her and the earth received them.
The Mochin that are implied in Aleph-Tav, which ZA, heaven, received from Bina, are called “rivers” , as it is written, “He will drink from the brook in the way; therefore he will lift up the head.” That is, ZA drinks from Yesod of Bina, called “stream,” the Mochin, and this is why he raises his head, meaning obtains GAR. This is why these Mochin are called “streams” . It is written, “All the rivers,” Mochin, implied in Aleph-Tav, “Go to the sea,” to the Nukva, since ZA received from the beginning only to impart them upon the Nukva, as it is said that the Hey emanated heaven, to give him life and root him so he becomes a root for the Nukva and not for himself.
This is why it is written, “And the earth.” He could have written, “And the earth”  and the male was implied in the Vav, and the Nukva in earth, without the word “the.” This is why it was said that the earth gathered everything into her, and the earth received them because the word “the” indicates the whole of the Mochin from Aleph to Tav. The words “And the earth” indicate that the earth collected into her and received within her all the Mochin implied in Aleph-Tav, meaning heaven and earth together. Also, “The heaven” implies heaven and earth together.
The ZON divide at the Chazeh—the great ZON from Chazeh and above, and the small ZON from Chazeh and below. Also, the core of ZA is from Chazeh and above, but from his Chazeh and below, he is considered his Nukva. Thus, ZON—from Chazeh and above—are both regarded as ZA himself, and ZON from Chazeh and below are both considered Nukva herself, where “And the earth” implies only the Nukva, called “earth.” There are ZA and Nukva in her, herself, which are called “heaven and earth,” the small ZON from Chazeh and below. Also, “The heaven,” which implies ZA, heaven, has ZA and Nukva in him, himself, which are called “heaven and earth,” the great ZON from Chazeh and above.
312) And the earth received “And the” to be nourished by them. This is why there are male and female in them by necessity, for the Vav of “And the” is male because the arrival of the matter into reception is in the beatings of the male. The fortress of the smoke is in the land, who is the Nukva. When the blazing fire extends and awakens from the left line, it grips to the Nukva and she billows smoke, as it is written, “And Mount Sinai was all in smoke because the Lord descended upon it in fire.” This is fire and that is smoke, meaning if that which descends from above is fire, the lower one who receives it becomes smoke.
It is written, “And the mountain smoking.” When the fire comes down, the smoke and the fire grip one another and everything is dominated by the left side, as it is written, “My hand also founded the earth, and My right spreads out the heavens.” “My hand also” is the left hand, which is fire and smoke. “Founded the earth” is the Nukva. “And My right spreads out the heavens,” and the right hand, Hassadim, measured and made the heaven, ZA, by the force of the right of above, Bina. It is so because ZA, heaven, receives the Hassadim from Bina. The heaven, male, ZA, were made similarly, from the right of Bina, and Nukva was made from the left of Bina.
This is why the Nukva cannot be without a male, as she is fire and smoke from the left side and needs the male’s Hassadim. This is why she is regarded as male and female together in regard to “And the earth.” When the Nukva is without a male, every kind of punishment in the world extends from her, as she is fire and smoke from the left side, and her entire correction is to be connected as one with the male, who is the right. Then all the abundance of the worlds extends from her.
313) “Raise your eyes on high.” Bina is called “on high” because the matters ascended up to Bina in a way that there is no question there. A question means raising MAN for a Zivug, like “Asking for the rains.” It begins with Bina because she is considered known. But above her, in Hochma, it is not known, meaning Hochma was perfected from Keter, who is called Ein . This is why she is not poised for a question like him, who is hidden and deep and there is no one to perceive and attain him.
This Mochin extend from the Zivug over Malchut de Miftacha, corrected in Bina, in her ZAT, who are called YESHSUT. For this reason, from there begins the question, the raising of MAN for a Zivug. At that time the Yod comes out of their Avir, leaving Ohr . But above her, in AVI, called Hochma, who are GAR like the Keter, there is no question because they are corrected in Malchut de Man’ula on whom there is no Zivug. This is why they are considered not known, like Keter de AA, who is called Ein, from whom AVI receive. Also, he is pure air because the Yod does not depart from their Avir.
The reason why Keter de AA is called Ein is because he is attached to Rosh Atik. They are three Roshim  one above the other and one inside the other. One above the other is Rosh Atik. One inside the other is HS de AA inside his Keter. Thus, they are three Roshim one below the other: The first Rosh is Rosh Atik, the second Rosh is Keter de AA, called Ein, the middle between Rosh Atik and HS, and the third Rosh is HS de AA, called simply AA.
Since the deep light, Bina, expanded, as it is written, “And very deep, who will find it,” her light is poised for a question because it is known. And although she is still hidden more than all the lower ones from her and below, she is called MI  after the question, as it is written, “Who has created these?”
314) It is written, “Out of whose abdomen came forth the ice?” “Out of whose ,” which is Bina, who is poised for a question. It comes out and is made in Malchut out of the upper one, out of Bina. The congealed sea comes out of the upper one, as it is written, “Out of whose abdomen came forth the ice?” It refers to ZAT de Bina, YESHSUT, called MI , when they impart Hochma without Hassadim, which is the point of Shuruk. Because of the absence of Hassadim, the lower ones congeal and freeze, hence although the letters ELEH have already risen up to Bina because the abundance is frozen, they do not join there to disclose the Elokim in Bina and she is still called MI.
However, once the Hassadim come out and clothe the Hochma, the letters MI join the letters ELEH, the name Elokim is completed, and she is no longer called MI. It is written, “Out of whose abdomen came forth the ice,” indicating that only when she imparts Hochma without Hassadim in regard to the point of Shuruk is she called MI, and not during the wholeness, when she receives the point of Hirik and the Hochma clothes in Hassadim, since then she is called Elokim and not MI.
We should not ask, “What is above and what is below?” Rather, we should seek the place where they come out to know, since three points are discerned in the exit of the Mochin from Bina—Holam, Shuruk, Hirik. There is no question at the points, Holam and Hirik, for it is forbidden to raise MAN in them to extend Hochma, but only at the point of Shuruk, which is the place of the exit of Hochma. We should not ask what is above, at the point of Holam, and what is below, at the point of Hirik. Rather, we should seek the place where they come out, the point of Shuruk, for then Bina is in Rosh AA and imparts Hochma, and it is discerned as the place of the exit of Hochma.
This does not mean extending Hochma at the point of Shuruk, since they cannot extend it, for everything is congealed and becomes ice, but then it is poised for a question, and not to know it. Then, at the point of Shuruk, is the time for raising MAN and for asking about the illumination of Hochma, but at that time it is impossible to receive anything because of the freezing. Rather, afterwards, at the point of Hirik, when Hochma is clothed in the Hassadim of Hirik, it is the time for receiving illumination of Hochma. Thus, the time of the question is at the point of Shuruk, and the time of reception is at the point of Hirik.
315) Beresheet indicates Bet-Resheet. He asks, “Does Beresheet mean Resheet, which is an utterance without the Bet, or Beresheet, which is an utterance with the Bet?” Indeed, before Malchut came out of Bina and her power expanded, and everything is still hidden in Bina, it is Beresheet and an utterance, since the Bet of Beresheet is the Malchut that rose to Bina, and the Bet of Beresheet is the point in his palace.
Thus, the Bet of Beresheet implies the ascent of Malchut to Bina, which is the entrance of the Yod to the light of Bina, making her Avir. Resheet indicates Bina. Prior to the exit of the Yod, Malchut, from the light of Bina, both are called Beresheet, and both together are an utterance. Beresheet together with the Bet is an utterance because an utterance means a degree that emerges on a Zivug de Hakaa, when a lip strikes a lip. And since the Zivug de Hakaa is made on the Bet of Beresheet, Malchut, it cannot be said that only Resheet, which is Bina alone, will be an utterance, since the Zivug de Hakaa was not made on the Masach de Bina.
Since the Yod, Malchut, departed from the Avir of Bina and the forces of Bina expanded, Bina is called Resheet. She is an utterance of her own, without the Bet, the Malchut, since she has already departed her. Also, now she is called MI, poised for a question, the one that ELEH created. This concerns the illumination of the point of Shuruk, which is still not called Elokim, but MI, for although the letters ELEH rose to Bina, they are still hidden, and as they are, they are considered outside of Bina. Barah  means hidden, Bina, when she is called MI, for then she hides the letters ELEH due to lack of Hassadim.
Afterwards, when Bina expanded and was perfected, she becomes Yam . That is, once she clothed in the Hassadim of the point of Hirik, when the letters ELEH conjoin with MI and the name Elokim is completed, it follows that when the letters MI came in the name Elokim, they become there the letters Yod-Mem. At that time Bina created her below, in Nukva, and did everything in her in that very same way as above.
Thus, as the order of the Mochin of above was in three places, three points—Holam, Shuruk, Hirik—Bina elicited the Mochin in the Nukva by the order of these three points, one opposite the other and one like the other. Both are implied in the Bet of Beresheet. One opposite the other means that each Behina in the Nukva received from its corresponding Behina in Bina. One like the other means that the full height of the Mochin that came out in Bina, also came out in the Nukva. Likewise, when they are in Katnut, it is implied that they are both in Bet de Beresheet, a point in his palace.
316) “While the king sat at his table, my perfume gave forth its fragrance.” “Sat at his table” means settling in the lower Malchut. The king is YESHSUT. “Sat at his table” means while clothing in Malchut and giving from the bonding and delight of the pleasantness in the upper Eden, upper AVI. They receive from upper AVI in that hidden, concealed, and unknown trail, as it is written, “A path that the eagle does not know,” and they are filled by them. The abundance comes in the known streams of YESHSUT—a path or a way.
And then, “My perfume gave forth its fragrance,” the lower Malchut. He created the world below, Malchut, like the world of above, the world of Bina, YESHSUT, in everything that they received from the upper Eden. The high good fragrance rises from the lower world to rule and to act, and Malchut is able and governs and illuminates in the upper light.
317) The world, ZON, was created in two Behinot, in the right and in the left of the six upper days, HGT NHY de Ima. The six days, HGT NHY de Ima, were made in order to illuminate to ZON in the right in them, as it is written, “For in six days,” HGT NHY de Ima, “The Lord made heaven and earth,” ZON, and by that, ZON received the right in them.
Those six upper days dug ways and made 60 holes in the great deep, Yesod de Ima, meaning the left of the six days of Ima, each of which consists of ten. Hence, 60 holes were dug in it and all were included in Yesod de Ima. These 60 holes are to bring the waters of the streams into the deep, to the Yesod of Nukva de ZA, called plainly “deep.” By that, ZON receive the left from the six days of Ima, called “the waters of the brooks,” as it is written, “He will drink from the brook in the way; therefore he will lift up the head.”
Since the world, ZON, drink from the upper stream, the left of Ima, through these 60 holes in her Yesod, called “the great deep,” “Therefore he will lift up his head,” obtaining GAR de Ima, called Rosh. It is so because the left of Ima is the Kelim that ZON obtain, for in those Kelim they obtain the lights of GAR from Ima. If they did not have the Kelim from Ima, the world would remain in VAK without a Rosh. This is why it was said that the 60 holes in the deep were created from the six days of creation, the six upper days of Ima, and became the peace of the world, in whom they received the Mochin de GAR from Ima, who is the peace of the world.
And the Land Was Unformed  and Void 
318) “And the land was unformed  and void ,” since the bitterness and waste of the fruits that do not ripen in the tree, which are called “hidden,” do not come out of them except by absorption that is unique to them, being the earth. Here, too, the bitterness and hardness of Malchut’s Dinim come out of her only by Bina’s absorption, when Midat ha Din in her is absorbed by Bina’s Midat ha Rachamim and she is mitigated.
There was the earth from the beginning. However, it did not exist but was rather unformed and void. This is why it is written “Was,” indicating that it already was, prior to the association of Malchut in Bina. Afterwards Malchut, who is the world, existed because the world was carved in Mem-Bet (42 ) letters and existed. All those 42 carvings are to crown the holy name, to extend within them the Mochin of the upper GAR de Ima, called “crowns,” as it is written, “Go forth, O daughters of Zion, and see King Solomon with the crown with which his mother has crowned him.”
The core of the name Mem-Bet  is GAR from Chazeh de AA and above, which are four letters of simple HaVaYaH, Keter, ten letters of filled HaVaYaH, Hochma, and 28 of HaVaYaH with filling of filling, Bina. Together, they are 42 letters, and they are the three Partzufim Atik, AA, and AVI from Chazeh de AA and above.
But from Chazeh de AA and below, there is no discernment of that Mem-Bet because it is VAK there and not GAR. However, there is the name Mem-Bet of the work of creation in them, in the count of the 32 Elokim and ten utterances, which are 42 in Gematria. It is applied in ZON from Chazeh de AA and below. The name Mem-Bet is carved in them through the association of Malchut in Bina, and the letters ELEH descended from Bina to ZON, by which they were qualified to receive the Mochin of the name Mem-Bet from Bina, which are AVI. That qualification is called “carving.”
The world was carved and existed in 42 letters. “World” means the Nukva, who is called “earth.” Prior to the association with Midat ha Rachamim, she was unformed and void, then the association with Midat ha Rachamim took place, as Malchut rose to Bina, by which the 42 letters from Chazeh de AA and above were carved in ZON, although they are from Chazeh and below. Then the world existed because Malchut, too, became fit to receive GAR, and all 42 letters that were carved in Malchut through the association were qualified to being crowns to the holy name, to Malchut. It is so because afterwards, when the letters ELEH that fell to ZON return to Bina, they raise ZON with them to Bina and ZON receive GAR de Bina, as it is written, “The crown with which his mother has crowned him.”
319) When the 42 letters that were carved in Malchut join to become names, receiving GAR, the letters rise up in the name Mem-Bet in Bina, and from there the letters come down to Nukva, who is called “world.” When they are crowned in crowns in the four directions of the world, HB TM in Malchut, the Nukva, world, can exist. That is, by her obtainment of crowns from Bina, which are GAR, she sustains the people in the world with them in a way that they are fit for their purpose, and those Mochin that Malchut receives exist in her through the good deeds of the people in the world.
The pattern and depiction of absorption in these Mochin that Malchut received is like a seal of a ring where what is imprinted acquires the same form as that which imprints it, not omitting a thing. Just as those hidden ones are unfit for eating until they are absorbed in the ground, the earth—which is Malchut—does not carry out her role of sustaining the people in the world until she rises to Bina and is absorbed in her. Also, the manner of absorption that Malchut absorbs in Bina is similar to a seal and what is imprinted from it, where the imprint acquires the exact same form of the seal.
There are three discernments to make here: 1) depicting the form of the seal while it is devoid of matter, 2) depicting the form when it is depicted in the substance of the imprint, 3) the wax that receives the imprint of the seal, to which the form of the seal passes.
Know that they are three names of Mem Bet:
The first Behina  of the name Mem Bet are AVI from Chazeh de AA and above. They are the essence of the form of the name Mem-Bet, and they are three Havayot , which are KHB who have 42 letters in them, but no substance fit for imprinting with is found there. They are considered Atzilut de Atzilut.
The second Behina of the name Mem-Bet is YESHSUT, who is from Chazeh de AA and below through his Tabur. They are regarded as substance that carries the form, Bina, who went outside of AA and was diminished due to the fall of her letters ELEH to ZON. During Gadlut, she returns her letters ELEH to her with the ZON, and she herself returns to Rosh AA, where she receives Hochma and imprints the ZON with her Mochin.
For this reason, YESHSUT, ZAT de Bina, are regarded as matter and form of the seal, since they actually imprint the ZON. But the first Behina of Mem-Bet, upper AVI, are not diminished due to Bina’s exit from Rosh AA and do not grow by Bina’s return to Rosh AA. They are always regarded as being in Rosh AA, clothing the five Sefirot de AA. This is why they are considered abstract form, without substance. Afterwards YESHSUT receive the abstract form of AVI, who clothes in their substance, and they are Beria de Atzilut.
The third Behina of the name Mem-Bet are ZON that stand below Tabur de AA. They are imprinted with the form of the seal, which is YESHSUT. These are the wax imprinted by the seal, Yetzira de Atzilut.
There is a name Mem-Bet in the form of a seal of written wax, there is a name Mem-Bet in the depiction of the form of the king engraved on a seal, and there is a name Mem-Bet in an abstract form without matter. The name Mem-Bet in the form without substance is the four letters of simple HaVaYaH Yod-Hey Vav-Hey and the ten letters of filled HaVaYaH, Yod  He  Vav  He , and the 28 letters of HaVaYaH with the filling of the filling—Yod  Vav  Dalet , He  Aleph , Vav  Aleph  Vav , He  Aleph , which together are 42 letters. This is the first Behina  of the name Mem-Bet, which is AVI from Chazeh de AA and above, Atzilut de Atzilut.
The name Mem-Bet is in an engraved form in the substance of the seal, EKYEH Asher EKYEH . The two names EKYEH are 42 in Gematria, and it is the second Behina of the name Mem-Bet, YESHSUT, from Chazeh to Tabur de AA, Beria de Atzilut.
The depiction of the name Mem-Bet imprinted in wax is the seven names in the initials of the poem, “Please, by the might of Your great right You will untie the tied.” There are six letters in each , and they are 42 letters Aleph-Bet-Gimel Yod-Tav-Tzadi Kof-Reish-Ayin Shin-Tet-Nun etc.. The name Mem-Bet, of “Please, by the might...” is the name Mem-Bet of the work of creation, which is 32 Elokim and ten utterances, the third Behina of the name Mem-Bet, which are the great ZON, Yetzira de Atzilut.
Each and every letter of the Mem-Bet  letters came in and came out, and the world was created, for in the beginning, Bina was entirely in Rosh AA; she was entirely in Mem-Bet letters. When Malchut entered Rosh de AA instead of Bina, and Bina departed from Rosh de AA—ZAT de Bina, YESHSUT, from Chazeh to Tabur de AA—their letters ELEH fell to ZON and Bina remained in VAK lacking a Rosh. It is considered that then each letter of the 42 letters that Bina had, which are GAR, have now departed her and were carved in ZON.
ZON, who received the letters ELEH of Bina, also received those 42 letters, by which Malchut was qualified to receive GAR. This is considered the creation of the world in a way that it can exist. And although she still does not have Mochin, because she absorbed the letters ELEH, she has the Kelim for Mochin de GAR.
The letters of Mem-Bet entered the seal, Bina, and the letters joined there to become the holy names that received the Mochin. Then Malchut, too, receives them, and the world—Malchut—persists. At the time of Gadlut, Bina returns her letters ELEH from ZON to her degree, and ZON that are attached to them rise along with them. Bina ascends to Rosh AA and becomes a seal of Mem-Bet once more, Mem-Bet of the second kind, two times EKYEH, which are 42 in Gematria.
Afterwards she imprints the Malchut who rose with her with that seal, and Malchut becomes Mem-Bet of the third kind, which is 32 Elokim and ten utterances. Then the world persists because she obtained the Mochin de GAR, which are the subsistence of the world.
320) They struck the staff of the great sea-monster and the 42 letters entered 1,500 cubits below Nukva that is considered dust. It is so because initially, in Tzimtzum Aleph, the Klipot had a grip only in Malchut and not above Malchut. But when Malchut rose to Bina and half the degree, which are the letters ELEH, Bina and TM, they descended below Malchut, and the force of Tzimtzum in Malchut was ruling also over Bina and TM that are below her.
Thus, the 42 letters are GAR KHB, extending from AVI above the Chazeh, and the Sefirot of AVI are thousands. It follows that 42 letters are 3,000. Therefore, it is considered that when Malchut rose to Bina and half the degree was split and came out downwards, half the degree of Mem-Bet, meaning 1,500, descended below Malchut that rose. Thus, 1,500 remained above, the letters MI, and 1,500 descended below Malchut—the letters ELEH.
They struck the 42 letters with the staff of the great sea-monster by the ascent of Malchut into Bina when half the degree departed below Malchut, and the 42 letters entered 1,500 cubits below Nukva that is considered dust. Hence, the Klipa of the great sea-monster gripped them because half the degree of Mem-Bet, 1,500 cubits, descended below the Nukva that is considered dust, which is the Malchut that rose above them. It follows that that force of Klipa that initially gripped only Malchut, now gripped those 1,500 cubits below Malchut.
Afterwards there was the great deep rising in the dark, and the darkness covered everything. The Tzimtzum that was made in half the degree of Bina because she descended below Malchut is called “the great deep.” At the time of Gadlut, when Bina returned to Rosh AA and returned the letters ELEH to her degree, the great deep in them rose and was mitigated in Bina, and the force of Tzimtzum parted from them. Instead, darkness was made in them, for lack of Hassadim in Rosh de AA, which is all Hochma, and the ZAT cannot receive Hochma without a clothing of Hassadim. For this reason, although the letters ELEH rose to the degree of Bina, they remained there without light, and the darkness covered everything.
That is, it became dark from both Hassadim and Hochma, since despite the presence of Hochma in AA, they cannot receive because the Hochma is without Hassadim. That illumination is called “the point of Shuruk.” Finally, the light comes out, fissures the dark, comes out, and illuminates in whole, as it is written, “He uncovers deep things out of darkness,” that the Zivug is done on Masach de Hirik, Masach de Behina Aleph, whose level is VAK. It follows that that Zivug fissures the degree once more into two, and it is said, “And fissures the dark.”
But then Hochma clothes in Hassadim and the light comes out and illuminates in full, but only in VAK de GAR, since the GAR de GAR is concealed by that Zivug of the Masach de Hirik, as it is Behina Aleph of the Masach. It therefore follows that the water, the Mochin that were now drawn, were weighed in the scales in the measure of 1,500, only VAK de GAR, half the degree, and not a complete degree.
321) Three drops were placed inside the scales along with the fingers. Half of them for subsistence, and half of them entered below. It is so because there are three joints in the hand, the part that is connected to the shoulder is NHY, the arm is HGT, the fingers are HBD. Two joints are the hand, VAK, and the fingers are GAR. The name Mem-Bet is GAR, KHB, hence they were given with the fingers, which are GAR, and are 3,000.
During the ascent of Malchut to Bina, the degree was halved into two halves—MI ELEH. Half of them, MI for subsistence, remained in the degree, and half, ELEH, went down, exited and went down to the degree of ZON. Therefore, they are regarded as placed in the two sides of the scales, MI on the right side and ELEH on the left side, these go up, those go down. Afterwards, when the letters ELEH on the left side go up and join with Bina at the point of Shuruk, the letters MI go down, their light disappears and becomes darkness.
Since the letters ELEH rise by the raising of the hand, the scales stand upright, where the letters MI and the letters ELEH are both up, illuminating in full. Raising the hand means at the point of Hirik, which comes out on Masach de Behina Aleph and extended the level of VAK, implied in the two joints of the hand without the fingers. At that time Hochma clothes in Hassadim and both illuminate equally, no longer contradicting one another.
He does not turn to the right or to the left because at the point of Holam he would turn to the right, to Hassadim without Hochma, and at the point of Shuruk he would turn to the left, to Hochma without Hassadim. But now at the point of Hirik, right and left clothe one another and it is considered that she no longer turns only to the right or only to the left as before, for they are included in one another.
It is written, “Who has measured the waters in the hollow of his hand.” Who  means Bina. “Measured” means through the Zivug that Bina made on Masach de Hirik, measuring VAK de GAR and concealing the GAR de GAR. It revolves around the water, Mochin, that were now drawn, weighed in the scales, in the measure of 1,500, meaning half the degree.
322) Everything was concealed in the earth and nothing was revealed in her. Her power and strength, and the lights, which are called “water,” were frozen within her, and neither leaked nor expanded.
Thus far The Zohar explained the matter of the elicitation of Mochin in Bina. Henceforth, it explains them in Malchut when she was sealed by Bina. It says that upon the elicitation of the Mochin at the point of Shuruk, before they clothed in Hassadim, all the lights in the earth, Malchut, were concealed and froze within her, and were unable to expand within her and illuminate.
Finally, the light from the point of Hirik, from above Bina, and the light struck in absorption and her powers opened. Absorption is the Mochin of Shuruk that she absorbed from Bina, for which she became concealed and frozen. When the light of Hirik was drawn to her, it struck those Mochin, meaning revoked their dominion so they would not rule by themselves but only by clothing in Hassadim.
Then the forces in Malchut awakened from their freezing, and it is written, “And God said, ‘Let there be light,’ and there was light.” “And there was” indicates that through the light of the point of Hirik, the first light that was in her before—prior to the freezing and concealment—illuminated in her once again, since the light of Hochma returned to illuminate in her and does not freeze her now because it clothed in Hassadim.
323) From here, from the light of the point of Hirik, all the forces and Gevurot in Malchut come out and become revealed. The earth, Malchut, was mitigated and later, in the third day, brought forth her powers. Once the light illuminated in Malchut and descended and illuminated in the world, its light expanded from the end of the world to its end. When the Creator looked upon the wicked of the world who were destined to sin in that light, He concealed the light, the light hid, and does not illuminate except in hidden trails that are not revealed.
Three Letters Tov 
324) “And God saw the light that it was good.” Any dream that stands in the solution of “And it was good” shows that there is peace for him above and below. In the upper world, where there is none who slanders him, and in the lower world. Each and every one sees letters in his dream according to his ways and actions. If he sees a Tet in his dream, it is good for him and good for his dream, since the Torah began writing the letter Tet with the words, “And it was good.” It is so because there is no letter Tet in the Torah prior to that, and it concerns the light that illuminated from the end of the world to its end. Therefore, Tet indicates that it is Tov , and good means illumination that illuminates in the complete wholeness.
325) The letter Tet is the ninth to everything, meaning Yesod, which is ninth to the ten Sefirot. It is a letter that illuminates through the upper one, who is called Resheet . It is included in it in AA, who is called Resheet because it is the first Partzuf, the carrier of the point of Miftacha, the point on which all the Mochin appear. And because the Tet receives from AA, who is called Resheet, she also illuminates in the point of Miftacha, and all the Mochin appear through her.
The Yod was made by the blocking that is at the point of Miftacha, which enters the light and becomes Avir, which is one point. That is, the Yod that enters the light of YESHSUT and became Avir, that Yod was made of the point of Miftacha, and the second point, Man’ula, is not disclosed in it. Hence, at the time of Gadlut the Yod comes out of the Avir, and that Yod was made of the point of Miftacha. The second point, Man’ula, is not disclosed in it. For this reason, at the time of Gadlut the Yod comes out of the Avir, and YESHSUT return to being light. But if the second point, the Man’ula, was connected to the Yod, then the Yod would not be able to exit the Avir, as it is in AVI. Also, she is one point because the second point, the Man’ula, did not connect to her.
The Vav, ZA, came out because of the Tet. When the heaven, ZA, ends, it is made in one point, Man’ula, and she is concealed within it. Afterwards the second point, extending from the Tet, the Miftacha, illuminated in it.
Commentary: ZA, Vav de HaVaYaH, the heaven, came out from the point of Miftacha through the Tet. However, first ZA was established at the point of Man’ula, and once it ended at the point of Chazeh de ZA—where the great Partzuf ZA ends because of the Tet—the point of Man’ula was concealed there and extended from Chazeh and below of ZA by the illumination of the second point at the point of Miftacha. Thus, the Sium of Partzuf ZA from Chazeh and above is at the point of Man’ula, and the Sium of Partzuf ZA from Chazeh and below, the small ZA, is at the point of Miftacha.
Two females come out of ZA: an upper one, above the Chazeh, and a lower one, below the Chazeh. The upper one is hidden, as it comes out from the point of Man’ula in ZA, and the lower one was disclosed in the two points of Man’ula and Miftacha. However, she stands only by the force of the upper point of Miftacha, and the point of Man’ula is hidden in it and is not apparent. This is why the Mochin are disclosed in her.
326) This is Tet-Vav-Bet . The Tet is Yesod de YESHSUT. The Vav is ZA. The Bet are the two females, upper and lower. These three letters Tov were later included in “A righteous is the foundation of the world,” who includes everything above and below, Yesod de ZA, who includes these three Behinot. It is written, “Say of the righteous, ‘It is good,’” since the righteous, Yesod , is called so because the three Behinot of upper light implied in Tet Vav Bet are included in him.
It is written, “The Lord is good to all.” The words “To all” do not detail to whom He is good because to illuminate one day that illuminates to all is Yesod, the sixth day, as it includes all five days. This is why Yesod is called “all,” and it is written, “The Lord is good to all,” for the good illuminates in Yesod.
The Correction of PBP de ZON
327) “In the beginning God created.” “In the beginning,” as it is written, “The first of your dough,” which is upper Hochma, called Resheet , since like the Resheet in the verse, “The first of your dough,” upper Hochma, the Resheet that is written here is upper Hochma, Bina that returns to being Hochma.
The Bet of Beresheet points to the Bayit  of the world, Nukva de ZA, who becomes a house for the settling of the world when she receives the Mochin de Hochma to water her, meaning she receives the Mochin from that river which entered her. It is written, “And a river comes out of Eden to water the garden.” The river means the one that collects everything from the upper depth—whose waters never stop—to water the garden.
A river is YESHSUT, which comes out of Eden, for AA, Eden, brought him outside the Rosh. He did it in order to water the garden, so YESHSUT would water the garden, the Nukva de ZA. Were it not for the elicitation of YESHSUT, the Nukva would have no Mochin. Also, YESHSUT does not receive the Mochin directly from AA, but through upper AVI, who are called “the upper depth,” and whose Zivug never stops.
328) That upper depth is the first Temple, AVI, in which the letters, the Kelim, end in one fine trail that is hidden in them. Explanation: They are two Masachim: Man’ula and Miftacha. The Sium de AVI is in the Masach de Man’ula, a hidden Masach. This is why AVI are called “the upper depth.” But YESHSUT, ZAT de Bina, end on the Masach de Miftacha, which is why they are known.
Two forces come out of that depth: the great ZON and the small ZON, as it is written, “The heaven,” which are the great ZON, ending in Man’ula, and “The earth,” which are the small ZON, ending in Miftacha. It does not write “heaven,” but “The heaven,” with a Hey . That Hey indicates that the heaven comes out of that depth that is the most hidden, from the fine trail in AVI, Man’ula. The verse, “And the earth,” indicates that that river, YESHSUT, elicited the earth, the small ZON, because AVI elicited the heaven, the great ZON, and YESHSUT elicited the earth, the small ZON.
329) But initially, the earth was regarded as heaven. And heaven and earth came forth, meaning ZON, as one, attached to one another in their Achoraim, when “the beginning of everything” illuminated, when the Nukva received the Mochin of Hochma, called “the beginning of everything.” Then heaven, ZA, took the Nukva and sat her in her place.
In the beginning of the elicitation of the Nukva she was attached to ZA, when both illuminated in one light of Hassadim. And since they were in equivalence of form without any difference from one to the other, they are regarded as attached to one another because Dvekut  of the spirituals is equivalence of form. The place of Dvekut was in the Achor of ZA, from Chazeh de ZA and below, where there are his Kelim de Achoraim, since from Chazeh and above of each Partzuf it is considered Kelim de Panim, and from Chazeh and below of each Partzuf it is considered Kelim de Achoraim.
Afterwards, when “the beginning of everything” illuminated, when the Nukva received the Mochin de Hochma, called “the beginning of everything,” it is considered that the Nukva was sawn off from ZA, that they parted from one another because now there is disparity of form between ZA and Nukva—ZA illuminating in light of Hassadim, and Nukva illuminating in light of Hochma—for a spiritual separation is but disparity of form.
At that time, heaven, ZA, took the Nukva and sat her in her place because she parted from him and ZA gave her a separate place, as it is written, “And the earth.” “And the” indicates the whole of the 22 letters, from Aleph to Tav, Et. It indicates that she parted from ZA and obtained separate Kelim in and of herself, since the 22 letters are all the Kelim of the Partzuf, for the entire wisdom is explained by the 22 letters, and none more are needed.
330) When the earth returned to sitting in her place and parted from the Achoraim of ZA, heaven, the earth was Tohu and Bohu , to cling as one to the heaven as before. The earth was darkened because she saw the heaven illuminating, since after she was parted from ZA through the light of Hochma that she received from YESHSUT—since YESHSUT rose to Rosh AA and became Hochma, giving to the Nukva—she had Hochma without Hassadim because AA is all Hochma, and ZAT cannot receive Hochma without Hassadim. This is why the Nukva was darkened and craved to cling to ZA from behind once more, to at least illuminate in Hassadim like ZA.
The darkness drawn in the Nukva until the upper light came out, was extended to her, and illuminated for her. Then she looked at the heaven, ZA, PBP, once again, and the earth, Nukva, was corrected and mitigated from the Dinim in her. She rose anew to Ibur to AVI and obtained from them Mochin de Panim.
331) Now he explains how the Nukva receives the above-mentioned upper light. He says that the light comes out on the right side because it is received by ZA, right, and the darkness remains on the left side, the Nukva. Then ZA separates the darkness from the light so they are included in one another. Then, by that separation, the Nukva receives the light from ZA, as it is written, “And God separated the light from the darkness.” By that separation, the day and the night mated and became one day, as it is written, “And God called the light ‘day,’ and the darkness He called ‘night.’ And there was evening and there was morning, one day.”
The verse, “And God separated between the light and the darkness,” is not actual separation, separation between the light and the darkness. Rather, it means that the day comes from the side of the light, which is right, and the night comes from the side of the darkness, which is left. And when they came out and ruled as one, He separated them. The separation was on the part of ZA in order to look PBP and to cling to one another, so they are completely one. This is a separation in the order of illumination, regarded as division to love, fondness, and persistence of the world, for it is applied in a Zivug to sustain the world.
332) ZA is called “day.” This is why it was said, “He called the light ‘day.’” He called the Nukva “night,” as it is written, “And God called the light ‘day,’ and the darkness He called ‘night.’” What is the darkness in the verse, “And the darkness He called ‘night’”? He says that it is the darkness that gripped to the night, who has no light of herself at all. That is, the night, Nukva, has nothing of her own, and even the darkness that clings to her is not hers, but darkness that extends to her from Ima, her left side, which is considered the point of Shuruk in YESHSUT. And although the darkness comes from the side of the fire, which is darkness, it is still not the Nukva’s herself, who has nothing of her own.
But the darkness is drawn until it illuminates on the part of the imparting of the day, until it receives Hassadim from ZA, who is called “day.” Then the light of Hochma dresses in light of Hassadim, and it follows that the day, ZA, illuminates to the night, Nukva. But the night herself does not illuminate because of the imparting of the day until the time of the end of correction, when it is written, “And the night will illuminate as the day.”
The Voice of the Lord Is Upon the Waters
333) Rabbi Elazar jumped first and explained the verse, “The voice of the Lord is upon the waters.” The voice of the Lord is the upper voice, appointed over the waters. ZA is called “voice.” When he ascends to Bina and decides there in the Masach of the point of Hirik between the point of Holam, right, and the point of Shuruk, left, at that time ZA is called “the upper voice.” He is appointed over the water, the Mochin, because through this decision that he makes between the right and the left of Bina, complementing there the name Elokim, he is rewarded with those Mochin of the three points, as well. From there they extend to his HGT, from HGT to NHY, and from NHY to Nukva. Therefore, the upper voice in Bina is regarded as appointed over all those Mochin because he is their root.
These waters, which are the Mochin, extend from degree to degree, from the degree of Bina to the degree of ZA, and from the degree of HGT de ZA to his degree of NHY, until the Mochin gather into one place, which is his Yesod, in one collection, for Yesod includes within it all the degrees, for which he is called “all.” That upper voice sends those waters on their way, to each Sefira according to her way, like that gardener who is appointed over the water cistern, sending the water to each place as it should. Likewise, the voice of the Lord is appointed over the waters, which are the Mochin.
334) It is written, “The God of glory thunders.” But God is the name of the Hesed, and thunders is an act of Gevura. How is this so? It is written, “Who will behold the thunder of His mighty deeds ?” This is a Behina that appears by observing the thunder of the Gevura and emerges from it. That is, the God of glory is the Hesed, appearing due to the Gevura, as the advantage of light from within the darkness. This is why it is written, “The God of glory thunders,” for He appears by thundering in Gevura.
Another explanation: “The God of glory thunders” is right, Hesed, from whom Gevura is emanated, since the Sefirot emerge and emanate from one another. Hence, the God of glory, Hesed, thunders, emanating Gevura, which is thunder.
“The Lord is upon many waters.” The Lord is appearance of the upper Hochma, Yod, the Mochin of upper AVI. “Upon many waters” means appearing over the hidden depth that emerged from it, as it is written, “And Your trails in many waters,” the Masach de Man’ula.
Thee are two kinds of Hitkalelut of the lines of right and left:
Once the middle line decides between them at the level of Hassadim that emerges on the Masach de Hirik and they are included in one another, Hochma of the left in Hassadim of the right, Hassadim in Hochma, and afterwards the right prevails and the Mochin remain in the Hassadim on the right line.
Once the lines are included in one another, the illumination of both of them remains. There are Hassadim and Hochma on the right, and there are Hassadim and Hochma on the left.
Know that the Hitkalelut of the first kind is Mochin de Neshama, and the Hitkalelut of the second kind is Mochin de Haya.
The explanation of Rabbi Elazar is in the Hitkalelut of the first kind, and it is written, “The God of glory thunders.” This is a Behina that appears through observing the thunder of the Gevura and emerges from it because once they are included in one another by the upper voice, the right line prevails. This is why the text ends “Upon many waters,” upon that hidden depth that came out of it, as it is written, “And Your trails in many waters.”
Since the level of Hassadim from Masach de Hirik that decides between the lines and includes them in one another comes out on a Masach of a very thin trail in ZA, which extends to it from upper Hochma—which is upper AVI—his light of Hassadim has the strength to overcome the left line and leave the Partzuf dominated only by Hassadim. Thus, the first explanation concerns the Hitkalelut of the first kind.
It was said that Rabbi Elazar jumped first and explained. First means before he was rewarded with Mochin de Haya, which is Hitkalelut of the second kind. He jumped and interpreted and explained the writings only by the Hitkalelut of the first kind, Mochin de Neshama. Below are the words of Rabbi Shimon according to the Hitkalelut of the second kind, in Mochin de Haya.
Opposite the Frame
335) Rabbi Shimon explained the Hitkalelut of the two lines right and left that were disputed, as it is written, “The rings shall be opposite from the frame.” The frame is a closed place that opens only for one fine one who is known within in humbleness, and by whose power it is filled with light. He mentioned gates to light the candles. Because it is a hidden and concealed place, it is called a “frame.” This is the next world, since the next world is called a “frame.”
Upper AVI are called “in the future,” and YESHSUT is called the “next world.” In terms of the Mochin of the point of Shuruk, which is illumination of Hochma, YESHSUT is called a “frame” because then the lights close and do not illuminate in her. It was said that it is a closed place, meaning during the illumination of the point of Shuruk, which cannot illuminate in light of Hochma for lack of Hassadim. It opens only in one thin trail, meaning that her lights open only by the arrival of the level of Hassadim by the Zivug on the Masach of the point of Hirik, Masach de Man’ula, called “very fine trail.”
That level of Hassadim is the determining line that unites the two lines with one another, and the Hochma dresses in Hassadim. But since the level of Hassadim emerges on that Masach in a very fine trail, it makes the illumination of Hochma in them known in humbleness, from below upward, which is VAK de GAR, and not from above downward, which is GAR de GAR. This is why YESHSUT are called “frame” even after the Hitkalelut of Hochma in Hassadim, since her lights do not illuminate as much as they can.
336) “The rings shall be.” These are the upper rings, HGT, above Chazeh de ZA, which grip to one another—water, fire, and wind—which are HGT de ZA. When they receive the Mochin, they are included in one another. The waters, Hesed, are included with Ruach , Tifferet, and Ruach with fire, Gevura, and fire with water. All are included in one another and emerge from one another like the rings.
The Mochin of upper AVI are called a “pure ring.” Those HGT de ZA are mingled and emerge from one another like the rings, which are the Mochin of AVI that do not appear in the manner of their Hitkalelut with one another. But after they have mingled with one another, the domination of Hesed over them prevails and they are like the rings, which are the Mochin de AVI, which are covered Hassadim. This is why HGT de ZA are also called “rings,” and the words, “The rings shall be,” relate to HGT de ZA.
All the rings look to that frame, YESHSUT, where the upper river is obtained for them, to water them, meaning the river that comes out of Eden, YESHSUT, and they cling to it. When the rings, HGT de ZA, are by themselves, they look toward upper AVI and receive from them covered Hassadim. This is why they are called “rings.” But when the rings wish to impart illumination of Hochma to NHY below the Chazeh, they look toward the frame, YESHSUT, where there is the river that comes out of Eden, which imparts illumination of Hochma, in which the Yod comes out of the Avir, leaving Ohr, and that river waters them with illumination of Hochma, and they impart to NHY.
337) It is written, “The rings shall be opposite from the frame, as homes  for the poles to carry the table” since those upper rings above Chazeh de ZA now become holders and places for the poles, which are NHY below Chazeh de ZA. That is, NHY receive from them the Mochin of illumination of Hochma, called “home ,” as it is written, “In wisdom shall a house be built.” It is considered that the rings became homes for the poles, which are NHY below the Chazeh, but not for themselves because for themselves they are not sockets but rings, meaning they are only in Mochin of covered Hassadim, called “rings.”
It is written, “The rings shall be opposite from the frame, as homes  for the poles.” When the rings wish to be homes for the poles, to impart Hochma upon them, then the rings will be opposite the frame, receiving from YESHSUT, who is called a “frame,” where there is illumination of Hochma. At that time the rings shall become homes for the poles, NHY.
The poles are the Merkava below because they extend from the upper Merkava, HGT, called “water, fire, wind.” The left line of the poles, Hod, comes from the side of fire of the upper Merkava, Gevura. The right line of the poles, Netzah, comes from the side of the water in the upper Merkava, Hesed, and the middle line of the poles, Yesod, extends from the side of the Ruach of the upper Merkava, Tifferet, and all that there is in the upper Merkava extends to the lower Merkava so the poles will be a Merkava for the Ark of the Covenant, where there is the instilling of Divinity.
For this reason, all who approach will approach those poles, NHY from Chazeh and below, and not what is before them, so they will not draw near, to extend Mochin from HGT above Chazeh de ZA. “‘Go forth,’ the hermit is told, ‘round about. You shall not approach the vineyard,’” except for those worthy of serving inside, whose soul is from Chazeh de ZA and above. They were given permission to enter, to serve, and to approach. This is why it is written, “The stranger who comes near shall be put to death.”
This explains the second kind of Hitkalelut of the lines in one another, where both lights remain, and only in the place of NHY, the poles, which receive from YESHSUT through the rings. By that Rabbi Shimon interpreted the dispute because once he sustains the illumination of both of them, it is considered that he settled the dispute and made peace between them. But Rabbi Elazar, who sustained only the illumination of the right, still did not settle the dispute properly.
Bet Resheet
338) The Bet of Beresheet is big in the Masoretes (a school of scribes and scholars). But who are the six days of creation? It is written, “The cedars of Lebanon, which He has planted.” As these cedars come out of Lebanon, the six days of creation come out from Beresheet. Beresheet is Hochma. The six days of creation are HGT NHY de ZA, which come out of Hochma, who is called Resheet.
339) The text interprets those six upper days of Beresheet, “Yours, O Lord, is the greatness,” which is Hesed, “and the power and the glory and the victory and the majesty, all that is in the heavens and the earth.” “All,” righteous, is Yesod. Thus, the text interprets the names of six Sefirot HGT NHY. “In the heavens” is Tifferet, and “In the earth” is the Assembly of Israel, Malchut. It follows from the writing that “All that is in the heavens and in the earth” means that the Yesod  of the world, Yesod de ZA, called “all,” is gripped to Tifferet, heaven, and to earth, the Assembly of Israel, Malchut.
340) This is why it was said Beresheet about Hochma, which is the letters of Bet Resheet. Bet, since Hochma is the second of the ten Sefirot. She is called Resheet because the upper Keter, who is hidden, is the first of the ten Sefirot. But because Keter is not counted among the Sefirot, the second Sefira, Hochma, is regarded as the Resheet .
The reason why Keter is not counted among the Sefirot is that in Atik, Keter, Tzimtzum Aleph is still ruling, and the ten Sefirot are from Tzimtzum Bet. And although he breached and did not breach, meaning was established also from Tzimtzum Bet, it was for AA, Hochma. This is why he is considered Atik, like AK, and does not join the Sefirot of the world of correction, which are all from Tzimtzum Bet.
Also, the Sefirot begin from Hochma, which is AA, or the Bina that becomes Hochma. Once Hochma de AA was concealed and does not give to Atzilut, Bina is operating in her stead. This is why it was said about her, Bet Resheet. Bet, since she is second in the emanation of the ten Sefirot. Resheet, since she is the first in the count, once Keter is not counted in the count.
Moreover, as upper Hochma is Resheet, the lower Hochma is also Resheet because from upper Hochma through Malchut, which is lower Hochma, there is no one among all the Sefirot to receive for himself illumination of Hochma. For this reason, the Bet must not be separated from Resheet.
This Bet implies, Malchut, bottom Hochma. And since there is no Sefira between them to receive Hochma, Malchut must be together with Resheet, and this is Bet Resheet.
341) Beresheet is regarded as an utterance among ten utterances. Six days come out of Beresheet and are included in her. An utterance means a complete degree in GAR. Is Beresheet also an utterance? After it has the letters Bara Sheet , indicating that it is VAK without GAR. He responds to that, that it is indeed a complete utterance. The reason why VAK is implied in it is that six days, HGT NHY de ZA, come out of it, and are therefore included in it. Those included in it are called “six” and are implied in it—Bara Sheet—like those six of ZA that came out of it, meaning after the six of ZA that emerged from it regarding Asher  that emerged from Beresheet. The letters Bara Sheet are implied in it, but in itself, it is a complete utterance.
342) “God created,” as it is written, “And a river came out of Eden to water the garden.” “Created” comes from the word “took out.” This is why it is written, “And a river comes out of Eden,” since “created” means that He took Bina outside of Rosh AA, called Resheet. This exit is implied in the words, “And a river came out of Eden” because a river is Bina, Eden is Hochma, and through the ascent of Malchut to Rosh AA, the river went out of Hochma to water the garden, Malchut, and sustain her, look at her, at all that she needs.
“To water” means imparting of Mochin of illumination of Hochma, called “drinking,” as it is written, “Eat, friends, drink and be drunken, O beloved.” To sustain means clothing of Hochma in Hassadim, for then the Mochin are sustainable. “To look at her” means at all that she needs, to bring her to the end of correction, for without the exit of the river from Eden, Malchut would be unfit to receive any Mochin, much less achieve her correction, as through the Mochin that she receives, she gradually arrives at the end of correction.
Beresheet Barah Elokim . Elokim  is Bina, called “living God” when she returns to Hochma. It is so because the meaning of “In the beginning God created” is only through that river. “Created” is the exit of the river from Eden. Elokim is the return of the river to Eden, since upon the exit of the river from Eden, the letters ELEH fell down, and now that she returns her letters ELEH to herself, she returns to Rosh AA and becomes Hochma. Afterwards she dresses the Hochma in Hassadim, and the letters ELEH join the letters MI, complementing the name Elokim in Bina. It is called “living God” as she is considered Hochma, called “light of Haya ,” to bring out and emanate everything, and to water everything, to impart Mochin of Hochma to all, which is called “drinking.”
343) “The heaven” indicates a connection of male and female. “The” is Nukva, “heaven” is male. They are the great ZON. Afterwards, in the connection of the great ZON, the world below was created, being the small ZON, from Chazeh de ZA and below. In it, in the world below, he gave wholeness to all. He is the Mochin of illumination of Hochma that was given only to the small ZON below the Chazeh.
“The heaven.” “The heaven,” ZA, emanated his Nukva, “the,” by the force he received from the living God, Bina, once Resheet, AA, emanated Bina in the name “living God.”
344) Once the living God emanated everything to all the Partzufim of Atzilut and everything settles and unites as one, the last ring becomes Resheet, meaning the last Partzuf in Atzilut—Nukva—becomes Resheet, receiving the Mochin de Hochma, called Resheet. But the Partzufim that preceded her do not receive these Mochin for themselves, but only to give to the Nukva. By that Resheet in the Nukva, he emanated upper lights, which are illumination of Hochma, she began to illuminate in illumination of Hochma, and water, Hassadim, begin to be drawn from her downward for the reception of the lower ones because they can receive only from the Nukva.
For all those reasons Nukva is also called Resheet. This is why God indeed created everything with Resheet, Hochma, since with her He created the lower world, Nukva de ZA, called Resheet, like her. In her, in Nukva de ZA, He elicited and disclosed the lights of Hochma. In her He placed the strength to all the degrees because the light of Hochma is the vitality of all the degrees.
345) This is why it is written, “Is the axe to boast over the one who chops with it?” To whom is the praise? Is it not to the craftsman who chops? It is the same with this Resheet. The upper Elokim, Bina, created the heaven. Whose praise is it? The praise is God’s, Bina’s. All the praise that came out in the work of creation, in ZON de Atzilut, and in the bottom BYA, is only Bina’s, since by the letters ELEH that she lowered from herself during Katnut, and returning them during Gadlut, the heaven and earth—ZON and BYA and all that fills them—came out. Had she not lowered her letters ELEH, this whole reality would not have existed.
346) It is written, “For what great nation is there that has a god so near to it.” Why does it write “near” in plural form ? It should have spoken in singular form. However, there is an upper Elokim, Bina, an Elokim of the fear of Isaac, Gevura de ZA, who is also called Elokim. The last Elokim, Nukva de ZA, is also called Elokim because the name Elokim of Bina expands and illuminates over Gevura and Malchut. This is why it is written “near” in plural form.
Many Gevurot are called by the name Elokim, which is 120 combinations of Elokim. These are combinations of Elokim that emerge from one Elokim, Bina, and all those names Elokim are one, for all are an extension of the upper Elokim, Bina.
347) “In the beginning ... created” implies KH. Elokim implies Bina, “The” implies greatness and Gevura. “The heaven” is Tifferet, and “The” implies NHY. “The earth” implies Malchut. All ten Sefirot are implied in the first verse in the Torah.
The Hidden Light
348) “And God said, ‘Let there be light.’” This is the light that the Creator created in the beginning, the light of the eyes, the light that the Creator showed to Adam HaRishon, by which he saw from the end of the world to its end, the light that the Creator showed to David, who was praising and saying about it, “How abundant is Your goodness, which You have hidden for those who fear You.” It is the light that the Creator showed to Moses, and by which he saw from Gilad to Dan, meaning the whole of the land of Israel.
349) When the Creator saw that three generations of wicked would arise—the generation of Enoch, the generation of the flood, and the generation of Babylon, He hid the light so those wicked would not use it. The Creator gave the light to Moses, who was using it during the three months that remained for him from the days of his Ibur , since he was born after six months and one day, and had three months remaining of the nine months of Ibur when he was not in Ibur. This is why it is written, “And she hid him three months.”
We learn that the Egyptians thought that she would give birth to him after nine months as usual, so they were not looking for Moses prior to the nine months, and she could hide him, for any person for whom a candle is lit over his head during his Ibur, he watches and sees from the end of the world to its end. The special thing about Moses is that even after he was born the Creator still gave him that light, meaning only that time while he was still meant to be in Ibur, which are three months from six months and one day through the complete nine months. But after nine months, the Creator took the light from him.
350) After three months, when he had nothing left of his days of Ibur, he came before Pharaoh. Pharaoh’s daughter found him on the bank of the Nile and brought him to Pharaoh, and then the Creator took all the light from him until he stood on Mount Sinai for the reception of the Torah. Then the Creator gave him back the light. He was working with the light all of his days, and the children of Israel could not approach him until he placed a cover over his face, as it is written, “And they were afraid to come near him.” He cloaked in the light as with a Talit, as it is written, “Covered with light as with a garment.”
351) “‘Let there be light,’ and there was light.” Anything that “Let there be” is said about it applies to this world and to the next world. They are two worlds, Bina and Malchut. Bina is called “the next world,” and Malchut is this world. All who is higher in merit is also regarded as earlier in time. This is why the next world is considered earlier, past, as it is Bina, who precedes Malchut. This world is considered later, in the future, since Malchut is later than Bina.
The words “And there was” contain two meanings, since “Let there be” means future, and the Vav at the beginning of the word makes it past tense. Hence, there are both past and future in it, which are the next world and this world. This is why he says that anything that “And there was” is said about applies to this world and to the next world, since both are implied in the words, “And there was.”
The light that the Creator created in the work of creation illuminated from the end of the world to the end of the world and was concealed.
352) Why was the light concealed? It was so the wicked of the world would not enjoy it. So the worlds do not enjoy the light because of the wicked, and it is concealed for the righteous, as it is written, “A light is sown for the righteous.” At that time, the worlds will be mitigated by the appearance of that light and they will all be one. And until the day when Bina, called “the next world,” is disclosed, that light will be hidden and concealed.
353) That light, which is revealed from the next world, comes out from the darkness that was engraved in the carvings of the most hidden, meaning in the carvings in Bina, who is the next world, in the point of Shuruk in her. It is so because when Bina rises and unites in Rosh AA, in which there is Hochma without Hassadim, the darkness comes out in ZAT de Bina, since ZAT de Bina is Hitkalelut of the ZON in Bina. Because they are primarily from Hassadim, they cannot receive the light of Hochma without clothing of Hassadim, and darkness is made in them. Finally, a hidden trail was made of the hidden light to the darkness below, which is the Masach de Hirik, and then the light is in it, meaning the light that is hidden in the worlds is revealed.
It is so because in Bina, the level of Hassadim emerges on Masach de Behina Aleph in ZON that rose to Bina, then the Hochma dresses in Hassadim and can illuminate. That Masach in ZON is the Nukva because it carries the Masach of ZA. It follows that through the Masach of the Nukva, the Mochin illuminated in Bina, for were it not for the level of Hassadim that emerged on her Masach, Bina would have stayed in the dark because of the point of Shuruk.
Thus, it is considered that the Masach of the Nukva was engraved and made into a trail that comes out of the light that is hidden in Bina to the darkness in the Nukva herself. By this trail, the hidden light extends from Bina to the Nukva because the lower who complements the upper one is itself rewarded with the full measure that it complemented for the upper one.
That light, which appears from the next world, was engraved in the carvings of the most hidden, until it was carved and extended by one hidden trail from that hidden light that illuminates in Bina. The light extends and comes by a trail that was erected by a Masach of the point of Hirik of the Nukva to the darkness below, the darkness of the Nukva herself, and from the Nukva the light appears in all the worlds. The darkness below is the darkness, called “night,” the Nukva of ZA.
354) This is why they interpreted what is written, “He uncovers deep things out of darkness.” If the meaning of the verse is that the deep things appear out of a hidden darkness—the darkness of Bina—then we see that all those upper Ketarim  in Bina are hidden. This is why the text calls them “Deep things.” Thus, what is “Uncovers deep things,” if they do not appear at all? Rather, all those upper hidden things appear only out of that darkness, the night, Nukva. All those deep and hidden things that come out of the thought, Bina, and the voice, ZA, takes them, they do not appear until the word reveals them. A word is speech, Malchut, since ZA in Mochin de Gadlut is called “voice,” and Malchut in Mochin de Gadlut is called “speech.”
Explanation: Those GAR de Bina that become hidden with the ascent of Malchut to her are called “Deep things.” Likewise, the upper Ketarim are hidden. It is written about them, “He uncovers deep things out of darkness.” Those GAR reappear from the darkness in the point of Shuruk from which the Hochma extends. The text does not refer merely to the hidden darkness of Bina at the point of Shuruk in her, since disclosure is through illumination of Hochma, and although Bina who receives Hochma does not receive for herself but for Malchut, while she herself remains forever in covered Hassadim, “For He desires mercy,” then how is it written about her, “uncovers the deep things out of darkness”? Thus, does the darkness not appear there at all?
Rather, it refers to the darkness of the night, the darkness of the Nukva, called “night,” who receives darkness from the point of Shuruk of Bina. It is written of her, “He uncovers deep things out of darkness,” since once she receives Hassadim from ZA, the Hochma, who was in her darkness on the left, at the point of Shuruk—for lack of clothing of Hassadim—now appears and comes out of the darkness, clothing in the Hassadim that she obtained. 
This is the unification of thought, voice, and speech: 1) a thought is Bina’s Mochin de Gadlut; 2) a voice is ZA in Gadlut; 3) speech is the Nukva in Gadlut. That is, when ZON receive the thought, Mochin de Gadlut, a Zivug between them is made in voice and in speech. And as with a corporeal person, whose thought is not recognized before it has clothed in voice and speech, and also not in a voice but only in speech, so here the illumination of Hochma appears neither in thought, Bina, nor in voice, ZA, but only in speech, the Nukva de ZA. Thus, the emanation of Mochin for all their details comes out primarily in thought, Bina, and the thought, with all that is in it, dresses in a voice, ZA, and from the voice they are all imparted to the speech, and all that was in the thought appears through the speech.
355) The speech, which is the unification of thought, voice, and speech, is called Shabbat , since Shabbat is the Nukva in Mochin de Gadlut, the letters Shin Bet-Tav. Shin implies GAR, Bet-Tav are the Nukva. Because the Shabbat is called “speech,” it is forbidden to discuss secular matters on Shabbat, for they blemish the great Zivug of voice and speech because that speech of Shabbat must rule in the world, and not the speech of weekdays, which are the Katnut of the Nukva.
The speech, Nukva in Mochin de Gadlut, who comes from the side of darkness, from the point of Shuruk, reveals deep things within her. That is, it is written about her, “Uncovers deep things from the darkness,” since the GAR de Hochma appear within her. This is implied from the words “From the darkness,” which means coming from the side of the darkness. The essence of the darkness is in Bina, and the darkness in Nukva is received from the darkness of Bina. And since it is written, “Uncovers deep things from the darkness,” and it is not written, “Reveals deep things in the darkness,” it means that it is about the Nukva, who comes from the darkness of Bina. This is why it is written, “From the darkness,” and not in the darkness itself, which is in Bina.
356) Thus, if the merit of the darkness is so great, why is it written, “And God divided between the light and the darkness,” meaning that He divided between the importance of the light and the lowliness of the night? Rather, first, the light elicited the quality of day, and the darkness the quality of night. Then it is written, “And God divided between the light and the darkness,” dividing between the great importance of the day and lowliness of the night. Afterwards, He connected the day and the night, which are ZON, together and they became one, as it is written, “And there was evening and there was morning, one day.”
Then it is written, “Uncovers deep things from the darkness,” and the merit of darkness grew extensively. And the word “divided” is written of the time of the exile, when they are separated from each other. Then it is written “Divided,” “As light excels over darkness,” and likewise prior to the Zivug.
357) Until the Zivug, the male was light and the Nukva darkness. Then ZON united as one, to be one—the male Partzuf was built from the right line, Hassadim, and the female Partzuf was built from the left line, Hochma without Hassadim, darkness, since the Hochma does not illuminate without clothing of Hassadim. In what are they separated, for which it is written about them, “Divided between the light and the darkness”? To recognize between the light and the darkness, the degrees initially part from one another, then the merits and demerits of the light in itself are recognized, as well as the merits and demerits of the darkness in itself.
Although there is a big advantage to the light over the darkness, it is still devoid of illumination of Hochma. Likewise, although there is merit to the darkness, for there is illumination of Hochma in it, the Hochma doesn’t shine in it for lack of clothing of Hassadim. Therefore, it is dark from both light of Hassadim and from light of Hochma.
And once the merits and demerits of each one separately were thoroughly recognized, they mated and both became as one because they mated, since they need one another. Thus, the light of ZA is complete only after it is included in the darkness of the Nukva, for then the light is complemented with illumination of Hochma, as well, and the darkness of Nukva is complete only after it is included in the light, since then it obtains the Hassadim from it, Hochma clothes in Hassadim and is able to illuminate. Although they mated and became one, they are still essentially different from one another because one is Hassadim and the other is Hochma. But despite the difference between them being so great, they became one and are mingled as one, for it is written, “And there was evening and there was morning, one day,” which means that they became one.
If My Covenant Is Not Day and Night
358) Rabbi Shimon says, “The world was created over the covenant, the Nukva in Katnut, and it exists.” Beria is Katnut; existence is Gadlut, the Mochin de GAR is the Nukva existence, as it is written, “If My covenant is not day and night, I have not appointed the ordinances of heaven and earth.” A covenant is a righteous, the foundation of the world, “Remember.”
Rabbi Yosi interprets the verse, “And there was evening and there was morning, one day.” The unification is in the words, “Uncovers deep things from the darkness,” which is the darkness of Malchut, night. Because Malchut is the carrier of the Masach de Hirik, it follows that as the Mochin appear only through the Hirik, the Mochin also appear only through her darkness. It therefore follows that day and night became one, that both are equal causes in the elicitation of the Mochin, “And there was evening and there was morning, one day.”
Rabbi Yitzhak interprets the verse, “And there was evening and there was morning, one day,” to mean the Hitkalelut  of the two lines—right and left—in one another. The day is the right line, and the night is the left line, and they mingle in one another, “And there was evening and there was morning, one day.”
Rabbi Shimon interpreted it to mean the unification of the Masach de Hirik, like Rabbi Yosi, but not on the Malchut, but only on Yesod. It is so because the Masach de Hirik is shared between Yesod and Malchut, for the correction of the Masach is considered Malchut in the circumcision and in “keep,” which is only a correction of the Kelim. But the Mochin that emerge on the Masach are regarded as Yesod, “remember,” and in the exposing, the disclosure of Mochin de GAR.
This is why Rabbi Shimon says that the world, Nukva, is standing over a covenant that connects day and night, ZON, as one, as it is written, “If My covenant is not day and night, I have not appointed the ordinances of heaven and earth.” “The ordinances of heaven” means the Mochin extending out of the upper Eden. “If My covenant is not day and night,” meaning were it not for Yesod, who connects day and night as one, which are ZON, through disclosure of the Mochin in Masach de Hirik. “The ordinances of heaven and earth” are the Mochin de GAR extending from Eden, which is Bina that becomes Hochma. “I have not appointed,” for without it there would be no presence of Mochin in ZON, which are called “heaven and earth.”
359) It is written, “At the sound of those who divide flocks among the watering places, there they shall recount the righteous deeds of the Lord, the righteous deeds for His peasantry in Israel. Then the people of the Lord went down to the gates.” “The sound of those who divide flocks” means the sound of Jacob, since “Those who divide the flocks” means like the middle man.
All the Mochin depend on Yesod, as it is the Masach de Hirik, as it is written, “The sound of those who divide,” the voice of Jacob, since Jacob is Tifferet, deciding between the two lines—right and left—which are called here, “Those who divide,” as they are two halves of the degree. The right and left of something are its two halves. And when Tifferet extends the level of Hassadim on the Masach de Hirik, by which it decides between the two halves, the GAR are drawn.
“Among the watering places” means that Tifferet sits among those who draw out water above, since Tifferet—Jacob, ZA—goes up to Bina and there decides with his Masach de Hirik between the two lines in Bina, the two points Holam Shuruk in Bina. Holam is Hassadim, right; Shuruk is Hochma, left; and the voice of Jacob decides and includes them in one another, and they are completed by one another.
Those two points, Holam Shuruk, in Bina, are called “Those who draw out water above,” since they include all the Mochin in Bina, and ZA journeys in two sides—in right and in left, Holam Shuruk, including them within him—because he decides between right and left and includes them in one another. By that, the wholeness of both of them is revealed, since now there are Hochma and Hassadim in the right, and Hochma and Hassadim in the left, and therefore ZA himself is rewarded with those Mochin of the two sides of Bina. It is so because the rule is that anything that the lower one causes to be added in the upper one, it is rewarded with that full amount that it added in the upper one, as well, since it is rewarded with them and includes them within it. Therefore, ZA also includes those three lines, HGT.
360) “There they shall recount the righteous deeds of the Lord.” “There” is the place for the queen, the Nukva above the Chazeh, to cling. It is so because there is a Zivug in ZON in those three lines with which he was rewarded from Bina, HBD HGT de ZA from Chazeh and above, above the Chazeh. The writing also indicates, “There they shall recount the righteous deeds of the Lord,” that it is from there that the righteous deeds of the Lord are suckled and drawn. NH de ZA, called “the righteous deeds of the Lord,” suckle and draw from that Zivug de ZON from Chazeh and above.” “Suckling” means that they receive Mochin de VAK, and “drawing” means that they receive illumination of Hochma. It follows that there are two matters in the verse, “There they shall recount the righteous deeds of the Lord: 1) indicating the Zivug of ZON above the Chazeh; 2) indicating that NH de ZA receive the Mochin from Zivug of ZON.
The words “The righteous deeds for His peasantry in Israel” indicate the righteous of the world, Yesod de ZA, covenant and holy, drawing and taking everything. Holy indicates extension of Hassadim, pure Avir from upper AVI, right line. Drawing indicates extension of illumination of Hochma from the left line. He takes everything from the determining between the right line and the left line, taking the illumination of them both, since as Tifferet decides between HG from Chazeh and above and includes them both, Yesod decides between NH from Chazeh and below and includes them both.
He spreads to the great sea, the Nukva, these upper waters, his Mochin, extending from Ima, upper water, in Israel, for Israel inherited that covenant and the Creator gave it to them as an everlasting inheritance.
361) Since Israel left the covenant because they were circumcising but not exposing, it is written about them, “Then the people of the Lord went down to the gates.” “Went down to the gates” means that they went down to the gates of Tzedek , that they were sitting at the gates and did not enter.
The Nukva is the king’s palace. When Israel were keeping the covenant, they were rewarded with being inside the king’s palace, receiving the Mochin from the interior of Nukva de ZA. But once they left the covenant, they drew far from the king’s palace and descended to the gates of the palace, called “gates of Tzedek,” and no longer came inside the interior of the palace.
It is written about that time, “And the children of Israel left the Lord,” until Deborah came and volunteered for them by extending and disclosing the upper Mochin for them, as it is written, “When the hair in Israel grows loose.” “Loose” means disclosures, as in, “And let the hair of the woman's head go loose.” This is the revealing of the Mochin that returned to Israel through Deborah.
362) This is why it is written about Israel when they left the covenant, “The peasantry ceased in Israel.” “The peasantry ceased” is His peasantry, as it was said in the explanation, “The righteous deeds for His peasantry in Israel,” which is the abundance of Mochin de Gadlut from Yesod to the great sea. And since they left the covenant, those Mochin ceased from Israel. The Mochin ceased from the holy covenant, called “peasantry,” because they circumcised but did not expose.
“The peasantry ceased ... until I, Deborah, arose, until I arose, a mother in Israel.” What does it mean that she called herself a “mother”? She said to them, “I lowered the upper water from above—the Mochin de GAR that extend from Ima—to keep the worlds. This is why she called herself a “mother,” since she revealed the Mochin from Ima. “In Israel,” since she became a mother to both Israel of above, ZA, and Israel of below, the children of Israel, since she extended the Mochin to ZA, too, as to Israel, to show that the world existed only on that covenant. The meaning of everything is the words, “A righteous is the foundation of the world,” who is the Yesod  on which the world stands.
363) Three come out of one; the one is in three. He enters between two, two nurse the one, and the one nurses several sides.
To explain the unification of “Evening and morning, one day,” The Zohar says, “Three come out and appear out of one,” as it is written, “The sound of those who divide flocks among the watering places,” that the two lines—right and left in Bina from Holam Shuruk are called “watering places.” The sound of those who divide, ZA, Jacob, rises to them and decides between them in Masach de Hirik, by which the right and left are included in one another, and three Mochin HBD come out in Bina.
Thus, three Mochin HBD come out of one, ZA, who rose to Bina. And since ZA caused the disclosure of three Mochin HBD in Bina, he is also rewarded with them, since the lower is rewarded with the full measure of illumination that it causes in the upper one. Therefore, one, who is ZA, is in three, for he, too, is rewarded with those three Mochin, HBD in the Rosh, and HGT through the Chazeh in the Guf. As it was said above, because he journeys to determine between the two lines—right and left of Ima—he himself includes them and is himself rewarded with those three lines, HGT.
NH, called “the righteousness of the Lord,” suckle and receive from the Zivug of ZA and the queen above the Chazeh. Once ZA is himself included in three Mochin de Ima, he entered and imparted them between the two from Chazeh and below, which are his NH, called “righteousness of the Lord,” and two nurse the one. Those two, NH, nurse the one, Yesod, who decides between them, and Yesod receives from them the Mochin. By that he is included in all the degrees, and then the one nurses to several sides, meaning that Yesod gives to Nukva, to all the Behinot of the Nukva. He draws and takes everything and spreads to the great sea, to Nukva.
Now Rabbi Shimon ends, “And then they are all one.” “Then” means that after Yesod imparted everything to the Nukva, all the degrees of ZA became one with the degrees of the Nukva. It is written, “And there was evening and there was morning, one day,” where evening and morning are mingled as one. It is also written, “If My covenant is not day and night,” since in it, in Yesod, ZA and Nukva—who are day and night—become one. Thus, the covenant, Yesod, makes the day and the night into one.
364) We learned that one who circumcises without exposing is as one who did not circumcise because circumcising and exposing are two degrees. Circumcising is “remember” and exposing is “keep.” The circumcising is Tzadik , exposing is Tzedek . The circumcising is male, exposing is female. Circumcising is the token of the covenant, Joseph, Yesod, exposing is the covenant, Rachel, Nukva de ZA. They must be connected—the Yesod with the Nukva. When he circumcises and exposes the circumcision, his works rise for MAN and he causes a Zivug for ZA with the Nukva. One who circumcised but did not expose is as one who separated ZA from the Nukva.
The Separating and Connecting Firmament
365) “And God said, ‘Let there be a firmament in the midst of the water, and let it divide between water and water.’” There are seven firmaments above, which is the Parsa in the place of Peh de AA, eliciting Bina outside of its head, and all stand in the upper Kedusha of Rosh de AA. The holy name Elokim is completed in them, returning the letters ELEH to MI, and completing the name Elokim. That firmament that is written here stands in the middle of the water, in Chazeh de AA, parting between HGT de AA above the Chazeh, and NHY de AA below the Chazeh.
Explanation: A firmament means Parsa, the Sium of Tzimtzum Bet, taking Bina and ZON of each degree outside of the degree. During Gadlut, it returns to Sium of Tzimtzum Aleph and returns the Bina and ZON to the degree.
Two firmaments are included in Atzilut: 1) the upper firmament in Peh de AA, taking AVI out from Rosh to HGT through the Chazeh; 2) the middle firmament, which stands at Chazeh de AA taking YESHSUT from the Rosh to Chazeh de AA through his Tabur.
There is also the bottom firmament, which ends the world of Atzilut, and of whom he is not speaking here.
And since the upper firmament in Peh de AA above ZAT de AA, HGT NHYM, includes them, it is regarded as seven firmaments, as HGT NHYM. The seven firmaments are above—the upper firmament in Peh de AA, which elicits AVI outside the Rosh and includes seven firmaments, and all stand in upper Kedusha because although that firmament takes AVI outside the Rosh, it still does not diminish them into VAK without a Rosh. Rather, they are regarded as still being in the upper Kedusha of Rosh AA, and the holy name is completed in them because that firmament returns the letters ELEH of Bina to Rosh de AA and complements the holy name Elokim.
That firmament in the verse, “Let there be a firmament in the midst of the water,” stands in the middle of the water. That firmament is not the upper firmament, but the middle firmament, standing in the middle of ZAT de AA, at his Chazeh, taking YESHSUT from Rosh de AA out to the place from Chazeh to Tabur de AA.
366) That firmament, the upper firmament in Peh de Rosh AA, stands over other animals and divides between the upper water and lower water.
There are two kinds of animals: 1) HGT, big animals; 2) NHY, small animals.
The upper firmament stands over the big animals because it stands at Peh de AA above HGT, but the middle firmament stands over the small animals, NHY, for it stands at the Chazeh, below HGT and above NHY.
The lower waters call upon the upper waters to raise them to them. They drink from that firmament, which raises them to the upper waters, and receive from there the Mochin of illumination of Hochma, which are called “drinking.” That firmament is also the one who divides between them. That is, there are two operations to the firmament, dividing and connecting. In Katnut, it separates between upper and lower waters, and in Gadlut it reunites the lower waters with the upper ones.
All the water, all the degrees, are included in the upper firmament. There are three firmaments, the new Siumim  by the force of Tzimtzum Bet, called Parsaot . The upper one is in Peh de AA, the middle one is in Chazeh de AA, and the bottom one is at the Sium of Atzilut. During Gadlut, the illumination of AB SAG de AK temporarily cancels the Siumim of Tzimtzum Bet and restores the Siumim of Tzimtzum Aleph, thus canceling the boundary of the Sium de Atzilut. At that time the bottom firmament descends once more from Sium de Atzilut to the point of this world, and raises the three separated worlds BYA to the world of Atzilut, to Chazeh de AA and below, where YESHSUT and ZON stand clothing over them.
Afterwards the middle firmament descends from Chazeh de AA to the Sium of Atzilut and raises YESHSUT and ZON—on which the three worlds BYA clothe—to AVI de Atzilut, since the boundary at the Chazeh has already been cancelled and they all clothe over AVI.
Finally, the upper firmament in Peh de AA descends to the Chazeh, and the boundary between the Rosh de AA and his HGT—where there are AVI, on which YESHSUT and ZON clothe, and on whom there are the three worlds BYA—is cancelled.
All rise to Rosh AA and receive there light of Hochma, hence the upper firmament includes all the degrees of ABYA, AVI, YESHSUT, and ZON de Atzilut, and the three worlds BYA. Upon descending from Peh de AA to the Chazeh, it raises all the degrees to Rosh de AA, which is why it was said that because all the water is included in the upper firmament, all the degrees of ABYA are included in it.
And once it imparted the Mochin to the upper animals, HGT, it lowers them to the animals from Chazeh and below, small animals, who suckle the Mochin of illumination of Hochma from there. Suckling indicates reception of Mochin of illumination of Hochma.
367) It is written, “A locked garden is my sister and bride, a locked rock, a spring sealed up.” “A locked garden” is the Nukva when all the lights are blocked in her, and all the lights are included in her. She is called “A locked garden” when the river that comes out of Eden stretches out of Eden and enters the Nukva to water her from Eden. “A river comes out of Eden” is Bina who came out of Rosh AA, called Eden, to water the garden.
When the upper firmament descends from his place to the Chazeh and raises all the degrees to the Rosh de AA, the Nukva receives Mochin of drinking and includes all the Mochin. However, it does not elicit their illumination because the water, Mochin, congeal and stand in it.
They congeal because the North wind blows in those waters, hence they congeal and do not come out until they become ice. The North wind is the left line extending from the point of Shuruk de Bina from the time when she rose to Rosh de AA, when she has Hochma without Hassadim. This is why the lights froze in her, since Hochma cannot illuminate without Hassadim. The lights froze in her and did not extend from her to illuminate outside, thus forming ice and freezing.
Were it not for the South side, the right line, who trampled the power of that ice, water would never have come out of it. Were it not for the Zivug that was made on the Masach de Hirik, which extends the level of Hassadim from the South, the right line, in which Hochma clothes and illuminates, the lights would never have been able to illuminate there, since even the Hochma in her wouldn’t be able to illuminate without Hassadim.
368) The appearance of the upper firmament is as the appearance of the ice that has congealed, gathering within it all those waters that are poured over it. Thus the upper firmament gathers over it all those waters and divides between the upper water and the lower water, as it is written, “And over the heads of the animal was an image of a firmament like the terrible ice.” This is the upper firmament, which as it descends from Peh de AA and raises all the lights of ABYA to Rosh AA, it becomes like the terrible ice, unable to illuminate for lack of Hassadim, which are in the Rosh of AA. By that it divides there between upper water and lower water because the GAR, upper water, can receive Hochma without Hassadim, but the ZAT, the lower water, cannot illuminate without Hassadim, they freeze, and they become ice.
That firmament gathers all the degrees, which are AVI, YESHSUT, and ZON de Atzilut, and raises them to Rosh AA. Then all the Behinot of ZAT, which cannot receive Hochma without Hassadim, freeze and it divides between the upper water and the lower water, dividing between GAR—upper water, which can illuminate in Hochma without Hassadim—and ZAT—bottom water, which cannot illuminate without Hassadim.
It is written, “Let there be a firmament in the midst of the water.” The firmament in the middle of the water is the middle firmament in Chazeh de AA. This seemingly means that the first firmament is that middle firmament. However, he says that it is not so. Rather, “Let there be” is written before the firmament here, since it is written, “Let there be a firmament,” indicating that the firmament that was made of the first firmament is the one standing in the middle of the water, but the first firmament stands over the heads of the animals, over HGT de AA, and not in the middle of the water, which is between HGT and NHY.
The words, “Let there be,” said in the work of creation, always indicate a Yod that entered the light Yod-Hey, AVI, becoming Avir. It is so because a Sium was made under KH de AVI, and that Sium is called the middle firmament, standing at Chazeh de AA, and their Bina and ZON fell below that firmament. Thus, that middle firmament is an offshoot that was made of the first firmament that stands at Peh de AA above AVI, on which the word “Let there be” revolves.
Indeed, the primary difference between the upper and lower water—that it took the bottom water outside the GAR, upper water—was made in the upper firmament in Peh de AA, for it elicited Bina and ZON from Rosh de AA, and AA remained with only KH, which is the upper water, and Bina and ZON de Rosh became the bottom water and his Guf.
However, up to the Chazeh, where upper AVI stand, no diminution is apparent there, and AVI is regarded as not having left the Rosh de AA, and they are considered GAR. The full force of diminution of eliciting Bina from Rosh AA, to be considered a Guf without a Rosh, begins only below AVI, in the middle firmament at the place of Chazeh de AA. Thus, the force of diminution of the upper firmament appears only in the middle firmament.
The firmament that was made of the first firmament is the one standing in the middle of the water, for this is the force of diminution in the middle firmament, which elicited the bottom water into being VAK without a Rosh. This extends and was made from the upper firmament, which could not be revealed in the firmament itself because it is above AVI, hence it appeared in the middle firmament.
Two principles are clarified here: 1) The force that divides water from water that is in the firmament, which is made during Katnut of the degrees, is made only through the middle firmament at the place of Chazeh. 2) The force that unites the bottom water with the upper one, which extends GAR to all the degrees, was made only by the upper firmament, standing at Peh de AA, raising them to Rosh AA.
369/1) There is a membrane in the middle of man’s intestines, which stops between them from below upward, stopping between the intestines, the feeding organs, and the vital organs, the heart and the lungs, which is called “the liver’s court.” The membrane begins opposite a person’s Tabur  and stretches from below upward diagonally through his Chazeh , drawing vitality from the vital organs above the Chazeh, and giving to the feeding organs below the Chazeh. Likewise, that membrane in the middle of the Guf  de AA extends from opposite the Tabur de AA through his Chazeh, and stands above the animals below, above the Sefirot NHYM, lower animals, dividing between upper water, HGT, and lower water, NHY.
These Waters Conceived and Begot Darkness
369/2) “These waters conceived and begot darkness.” It is written about it, “And the veil shall divide for you between the holy and the holy of holies,” since once the upper firmament in the Peh of AA descends and raises all the degrees to Rosh de AA, where there is Hochma without Hassadim, it becomes dark and frozen in all the Behinot of lower waters, ZAT, that rose up there, for they cannot receive Hochma without Hassadim. It is considered that the upper water, GAR de AA, conceived, because the lower water that rose and were included in GAR de AA are regarded as an embryo in its mother’s intestines, as they are a foreign body there, like the embryo, which is a foreign body included in its mother’s body.
However, they begot darkness. Even after the upper water gave the Mochin de Hochma to the lower water, they were born and came out in darkness and freezing because the lower water cannot receive the great light of Rosh AA without Hassadim, as it is written, “The veil shall divide for you between the holy and the holy of holies.” It is so because the veil, the upper firmament in Peh de AA—which divides between GAR de AA, the holy of holies, upper water, and ZAT de AA, the lower water—is holy, since the upper water, GAR, the holy of holies, can receive Hochma without Hassadim, but the lower water, ZAT, holy, cannot receive Hochma without Hassadim and become darkness. It follows that the veil divides between the holy and the holy of holies.
370) It is written, “Who lays the beams of His upper chambers in the waters; He makes the clouds His chariots; He walks upon the wings of the wind.” “In the waters” means the uppermost water, AVI, GAR de Bina, with which He corrected the house, Nukva de ZA, as it is written, “In wisdom shall a house be built, and in understanding shall it be established.”
Here The Zohar explains the text, “Who lays the beams of His upper chambers in the waters,” as the order of elicitation of Mochin in three points—Holam, Shuruk, Hirik. “Who lays the beams of His upper chambers in the waters” indicates the point of Holam, MI, which remained in the degree, which receives from GAR de Bina. In that regard he brings the verse, “In wisdom shall a house be built,” to indicate that the Hochma  illuminates in the house, Nukva, only by extending Hassadim from GAR de Bina, AVI, MI, the point of Holam. Also, he explains the verse, “He makes the clouds His chariots,” in relation to the point of Shuruk, and “He walks upon the wings of the wind” in relation to the point of Hirik.
371) “He makes the clouds His chariots.” The word Avim  divides into two: Av  Yam . Av is the darkness of the left, standing by that Yam. The verse, “He makes the clouds His chariots,” indicates the Mochin of the point of Shuruk, which illuminate in the left, in darkness and freezing. This is why they are implied in the word Ab of Avim. It is known that these Mochin are received only by Nukva de ZA, who is then called Yam, hence the verse attaches these Mochin to the word Yam, which is the name of the Nukva when she receives these Mochin from the left.
“He walks upon the wings of the wind” is the wind of the upper Temple. It is as it is written, “Two cherubim of gold.” The words, “He walks upon the wings of the wind” point to the level of Hassadim emerging on the Masach of the point of Hirik uniting the two points Holam and Shuruk with one another because “wings” is a Masach. The wind is the quality of the light that emerges on that Masach, the level of Hassadim extending from the upper Temple, upper AVI. This is the “Two cherubim of gold,” ZON, since “He walks on the wings of the wind” points to the male cherub, ZA, whose illumination is covered Hassadim, and the words, “He makes the clouds His chariots,” points to the cherub, Nukva de ZA, illuminating in illumination of Hochma.
It is written, “And He rode upon a cherub and flew; and He sped upon the wings of the wind.” First He rode upon a cherub, the Nukva cherub, Av Yam . Afterwards He sped on the wings of the wind, the male cherub, at the level of Hassadim, revealed on the Masach de Hirik. Until it awoke, He was not seen in it because until the illumination of Hassadim of the male cherub awoke, as it is written, “And He sped upon the wings of the wind,” the Merkava  was not revealed in the female cherub, as it is written, “And He rode upon a cherub and flew,” for the female’s illumination of Hochma, the point of Shuruk, cannot illuminate before it is clothed in a clothing of illumination of Hassadim from the point of Hirik.
372) It is written, “And meted out the waters by measure.” This indicates that he meted them in actual measuring where the water came into the measure. “By measure” means the limitation that was made with the Zivug on Masach de Hirik, the Masach of Behina Aleph, water, the Mochin. The Mochin of Holam and Shuruk could not illuminate before they reached the measure and the limit made by Masach de Hirik. This is why it is written, “And meted out the waters by measure,” for they were established and could illuminate upon the arrival of the water into the measure. They are the correction of the world when they reach the measure on the part of the Gevura.
A Zivug made on Masach of Behina Aleph extends only VAK without a Rosh, which is a great diminution. But here, since the Mochin have already come from the left, Gevura, and have already received the Hochma from there at the point of Shuruk, yet cannot illuminate without Hassadim, they receive their correction when they arrive into the measure of the point of Hirik. It is so because they clothe in the level of Hassadim inside the measure and become corrected, to illuminate in the world, Nukva de ZA.
They are the correction of the world when they reach the measure on the part of Gevura. However, before they received the Mochin from the left, there is nothing of the correction of the world, the Nukva, in the measure, since then the measure gives only VAK without a Rosh. And as evidence, the First would say that when the sages reached that place, the matter of the measure, which corrects the water, the lips of the sages would move but they would not say a thing for fear of being punished. Thus, there is no correction of the world at all in the measure itself, but only when the Mochin come from the side of Gevura, and already have the Mochin de Hochma from the point of Shuruk that is there. Then the measure corrects the Mochin because she clothes them with the Hassadim in her.
373) The first letter of the letters was flying over the pure connection and was crowned from below and from above. Letters are the Kelim of ZON, which receive their lights through ascending to AVI. The Masach in AVI is called “the pure connection,” and when ZON rise to AVI they are included in the Zivug that is made there on that Masach.
“The first letter of the letters was flying over the pure connection,” meaning it rose and was included in the Masach in AVI. “...and was crowned” means that she received there the Mochin, called “crowns.” “From below” means from the Mochin de Shuruk,” illuminating below,” meaning they are extended from above downward. “From above” means the Mochin of the point of Holam, which illuminate from above.
This is the two lines—right and left—that the letters receive first in AVI, then there is a dispute between them. This is the meaning of ascending and descending, that once it ascends and illuminates above in the illumination of the Holam, and once it descends and illuminates below in the illumination of the Shuruk. That is, once the right line prevails, and once the left line prevails.
The waters, which are the Mochin, are carved in their carvings, receiving the carvings of the Masach of the point of Hirik. At that time the Mochin settle in their places and the two lines of Holam and Shuruk are included in one another because it is the middle line that extends from the level of Hassadim that emerges on the Masach de Hirik, which decides and unites the two lines with one another.
Likewise, first, all the letters rose to AVI and received the Mochin from the two lines, right and left, which extend from the points Holam and Shuruk in AVI, and then the illumination of the point of Hirik. Then they were included in one anther and crowned in one another until the structure of Partzuf ZON and its Yesod was built over them.
374) When all the letters were built and crowned in Mochin de GAR through their Hitkalelut  in AVI, the upper water was mingling with the lower water and elicited the house of the world. AVI are regarded as upper water; ZON are regarded as lower water. When they received the Mochin of Holam Shuruk Hirik from AVI, the Kelim de ZA mingled with the Kelim de AVI for the difference between them had never been recognized. By that, they elicited Mochin de Hochma to the Nukva, and then the Nukva is called “the house of the world.”
First, the letters of ZA that included in the upper water were established and the two lines received the Mochin from the two points—Holam and Shuruk—in AVI. Afterwards they received the middle line from the point of Hirik and were completed. Then the Nukva was established in that manner, too. First she received the two lines right and left, and then she was called “the house of the world,” since the name “house” points to the light of Hochma received by the Masach de Shuruk. Yet, it is still not settling in the house because there is settling only in illumination of the point of Hirik.
Hence, the house, Nukva, is seen first, as the waters ascend and descend in her. First she received the house, the two lines from Holam and from Shuruk, then the dispute between them occurred. Once they ascend, when the right line prevails, extending from the point of Holam that illuminates from above, and once they descend, when the left line prevails in her, extending from Shuruk, which illuminates from above downward. It is as with the letters of ZA, until the firmament was made and divided between them.
The middle line, which extends from the Masach of the point of Hirik, is called “firmament.” When that firmament was made, it extended the middle line in Nukva and removed the dispute of the two lines in the Nukva because it clothed and included them in one another.
The dispute of the two lines, right and left, was on the second day of the work of creation, in which Hell was created due to the dispute between the lines. This is a burning fire, as it is written, “For it is consuming fire,” and he will be on the head of the wicked.
375) From this we learn that any dispute that is for the Creator endures, since here there was a dispute for the Creator, meaning for ZA, and the heaven exists afterwards, on the third day, due to that dispute, as it is written, “And God called the firmament, ‘heaven.’” “Called” means that He called and summoned, so that afterwards, on the third day, the firmament would be as heaven, ZA.
The reason why ZA receives the Mochin de Gadlut from AVI is that there was a dispute between the two lines that extend from the two points, Holam Shuruk, in AVI and they could not illuminate in them until the Zivug on the Masach of the point of Hirik was made, deciding between them. AVI received that Masach from ZA who rose to them. It follows that ZA causes the Mochin to exist in AVI, hence he is also rewarded with those Mochin, since the lower one is rewarded with all that it causes to illuminate in the upper one.
Thus, all the Mochin of ZA are only because of the dispute between right and left that was in Ima, with which he was rewarded due to the decision. Were it not for this dispute in AVI, ZON would have had no Mochin. Hence, any dispute that is for the Creator endures, since heaven is ZA, and the dispute that was in AVI was for the Mochin for heaven. Without it there would be no Mochin for heaven.
However, this was not on the second day, during the elicitation of the firmament, but on the third day, for then was the decision in the lines made, and the heaven exited afterwards, on the third day, as it is written, “And God called the firmament ‘heaven,’” which is a summoning for the third day, when the decision was completed, for which ZA receives the Mochin.
The construction of the house and the attic is in beams among which they are present and exist, since those beams among them are a floor for the attic and a ceiling for the house. It follows that from them comes all the existence of the house and the attic because before the beams are placed in the middle of the building there was no existence to those house and attic. They exist through them because if those beams are cancelled, the house and attic will immediately be cancelled too, as it is written, “And the veil shall divide for you between the holy and the holy of holies.” The actual holy and holy of holies were made by the veil and exist by it, since the veil is the firmament that divides inside in the middle between the upper waters and the lower waters.
AVI are upper waters and ZON are lower waters. Were it not for the firmament, ZA, which decided between the two lines of AVI, there would be no Mochin to the lower ones, ZON, because all the Mochin de ZA extend to him only thanks to his decision in AVI. Thus, their existence, meaning the Mochin of the lower waters, depends on the firmament. Likewise, the existence of the upper waters depends on the firmament because as long as the firmament did not decide between the two lines right and left in them, the lights were ascending and descending and did not illuminate.
Hence both the upper waters and the lower waters exist only through the firmament. This is similar to the beams between the house and the attic, where the actual house and attic are made by the beams. The dispute for the Creator  is the dispute between the lines of AVI, for without that dispute, ZA—heaven—would be without Mochin and would not exist. Because the firmament, ZA, sustained the Mochin in AVI, the Mochin existed in it as well.
376) Afterwards it is written, “Let the waters be gathered under the heaven unto one place.” Literally under the heaven. Heaven is ZA. “Under the heaven” is the Nukva de ZA below the degree of ZA. Water is Mochin. The Mochin will gather to the Nukva. Wherever it is said “under,” it is from Chazeh and below of that degree because the essence of each degree is from Chazeh and above. But here the text does not refer to Chazeh and below of ZA, called “heaven,” but to actually below, under the entire degree of ZA, who is the Nukva. “Unto one place” means unto a place called “one,” which is the lower sea, the Nukva, since the Nukva complements the name Ehad , and without the Nukva ZA is not called “one.”
ZA is called Eh  and the Nukva is called Dalet. When there is unification of ZA and Nukva, Aleph-Het with Dalet, the name Ehad appears in them. Thus, the Nukva, Dalet, complements the Ehad, hence the Nukva is called “one place.” It means that the meaning of the verse, “Let the waters gather,” in the Nukva, where all the waters gather, as it is written, “All the rivers go to the sea,” which is the Nukva.
377) “Unto one place” is as it is written, “And My covenant of peace shall not be removed,” meaning Yesod de ZA, who is called “a covenant of peace.” Thus, Yesod takes all the lights, as it is written, “Let the waters be gathered,” and throws them into the sea, the Nukva, when she has Mochin de Hochma. Through it, the land, the Nukva, is established, when she has all the Mochin—both Hochma and Hassadim. It is written, “And let the dry land appear.” This is earth, as it is written, “And God called the dry land ‘earth.’” Accordingly, the meaning of the words, “Let the waters gather,” is the Mochin, to Yesod de ZA, who is called “one place,” and he gives them to the Nukva. This is “And let the dry land,” which is the Nukva, “Appear.”
378) Why is the Nukva called “dry land”? It is written about her, “bread of poverty” without Vav , indicating the Nukva when there is Hochma without Hassadim. At that time she is called “bread of poverty” because she cannot illuminate. This is why she is also called “dry,” without water, which are the Mochin, since the Hochma in her cannot illuminate without clothing from Hassadim.
This is why the Nukva sucks into her all the waters of the world, the light of Hochma, which includes all the Mochin de GAR. For this reason, she remains as dry as though she had never had any Mochin, for lack of clothing of Hassadim, for the Hochma does not illuminate without them, until that place, Yesod, when the “one place” was created, fills her with light of Hassadim. At that time the water extends through these sources of abundance of Yesod through the clothing of Hochma in the light of Hassadim.
379) “And the gathering of the waters He called ‘seas.’” This is the collection of the water above in Bina, for there all the waters gather, and from there they are drawn and come out. The root of the Mochin is in Bina, in Partzuf YESHSUT, and the words, “Let the waters gather” means that they will extend from YESHSUT. “Unto one place” is the Yesod, and from Yesod to Nukva. This is why the writing ends, “And the gathering of the waters,” the root and the outlet of those Mochin, “He called ‘seas.’”
The gathering of the water is righteous, Yesod de ZA. It is so because when Yesod reaches the gathering of the water it is written, “And God saw that it was good.” It is also written, “Say to the righteous, ‘It is good.’” Here the verse speaks of Mochin de Hochma that extend from the left line, the point of Shuruk. Before the arrival of the third day, Tifferet and Yesod, the deciding line, those Mochin could not illuminate. This is why it wasn’t said on the second day, “That it was good.”
Therefore, the words, “gathering of water,” are not interpreted as the left line in Bina because it was said about it, “It was good,” hence it was already subjugated by the Yesod, which clothed the Hochma in Hassadim. Prior to that, the Hochma does not illuminate, so how is it written about it, “And God saw that it was good”? This is why the verse is interpreted as Yesod, righteous, by whom the Mochin were made “That it was good,” as it is written, “Say to the righteous, ‘It is good,’” which decided between them.
However, Israel, ZA, is called “a gathering of water,” since it is written, “The hope of Israel is the Lord,” since the third line decides and clothes the two lines right and left in one another, at which time it is said about him, “It is good,” including Tifferet and Yesod, the covenant and body are considered as one for him. The third day is in Tifferet itself. This is why “The gathering of water” is not interpreted as Yesod, but as Tifferet, which is Israel, for the third day is Tifferet, deciding between the lines, and by which the Mochin of the left were made “It is good,” as it is written, “And God saw that it was good,” and there is no need to interpret it as Yesod.
380) It was said that the gathering of water is a righteous, Yesod de ZA, as it is written, “And the gathering of the waters He called ‘seas.’” This is the name of the Mochin de Hochma because the streams, springs, and rivers, which are all the Behinot of Mochin de Hochma, are all taken by Yesod. Because he is the source of all of them with its decision, he takes them all, and this is why he is called “seas.” This is why it is written, “And God saw that it was good,” since Yesod corrects these Mochin de Hochma. This is why now the text says, “It was good.”
However, if the words, “Gathering of water,” are interpreted as Israel, Tifferet, who does not illuminate in Mochin de Hochma, called “days,” but only in covered Hassadim, then why is he called “seas,” which is Mochin de Hochma? Also, why is it written, “It was good,” which means clothing of Hochma in Hassadim? After all, all of it is not revealed from Chazeh de ZA and above because the middle line that is there is Tifferet, but from his Chazeh and below where the middle line is Yesod.
381) Because he includes all the Mochin within it, both Hochma and Hassadim, he divided, for it was not said, “It is good,” about the Mochin between the first day and the third day, in the Mochin of the second day. That is, compared to the great light that emerged on the third day through Yesod, the previous Mochin on the second day are considered less, enough to not be worthy of saying “It is good” about them.
Were it not for that great advantage of Yesod, the Mochin of the second day would not be recognized as inferior, since on the third day the land bore fruit, meaning Nukva, through the righteous, Yesod, as it is written, “And God said, ‘Let the earth put forth grass, herb yielding seed, fruit-bearing tree yielding fruit after its kind, whose seed is on the earth.” The fruit-tree is the tree of knowledge of good and evil, Nukva de ZA. “Fruit-bearing” means the righteous, the foundation  of the world, Yesod de ZA, who makes all the fruits and gives them to the Nukva. And because of that advantage of Yesod, the second day is regarded as so inferior that “It was good” is not said about it.
382) “Fruit-bearing tree yielding fruit after its kind” means that every person with a holy spirit, which is a fruit of that tree, of Nukva de ZA, Yesod inscribes in them a Reshimo after its kind. This is Yesod de ZA, a holy covenant, a covenant of peace. So are the ones with faith, those who have been rewarded with a holy spirit from the Nukva. They are like its kind, who are also rewarded with the degrees of the holy covenant and the covenant of peace. They enter its kind, clinging to it, and never parting from it.
The meaning of the words, “Fruit-bearing tree yielding fruit after its kind,” is the righteous, Yesod. He makes fruits—spirits and souls of people. The tree, Nukva de ZA, is impregnated with those fruits that she receives from Yesod, who are the spirits and the souls, and elicits that fruit after its kind, after the kind of the fruit-bearing, which is Yesod, so the receiver of the fruit will be like him. This is why it is written, “Fruit-bearing tree yielding fruit after its kind,” since the spirits come from Yesod, who makes them, and gives them to the fruit-tree, Nukva. Nukva gives them to people, and they are similar to the fruit-bearing, Yesod. This is why he says, “Yielding fruit after its kind.” The meaning of the difference, whether they are similar to Yesod or to Nukva, will be explained below.
383) Happy is he who is similar to his father and his mother, who are ZON. Hence, the holy Reshimo, the cutting of the foreskin on the eighth day, is for him to equalize his mother’s merit, Nukva de ZA. And when the holy Reshimo is exposed and revealed, so he would equalize with his father, ZA, since through the Mitzva of circumcision he is rewarded with receiving Mochin de Nukva, and through the exposing he receives Mochin de ZA, hence a fruit-tree is Ima, Nukva de ZA. “Yielding fruit” is the holy covenant, Yesod de ZA, his father. “After its kind,” so he resembles his father and is marked in him, receiving all his virtues.
384) “Whose seed is on the earth.” It should have written, “Seed in him” without the Vav . However, the seed of Vav is in him, the seed of ZA, who is called Vav, is in him. It is written, “On the earth,” since ZA gives that seed on the earth, the Nukva.
Happy are Israel, who are holy and are similar to the holy. They receive Mochin from ZON and are similar to them. This is why it is written, “And you people are all righteous.” Of course they are righteous, since their souls come out of the righteous, Yesodot de ZON, hence they are similar to them. Happy are they in this world and in the next world.
385) It is written, “He makes the earth by His power.” “He makes the earth” is the Creator above. The Creator makes the Nukva, earth, from the Zivug of ZON from Chazeh and above, from which covered Hassadim are given. “By His power” is a righteous, Yesod de ZA, where by his Yesod, he gives the Hassadim to Nukva.
It is written, “He prepares the world by His wisdom.” The world is the land below. That is, in Zivug ZON from Chazeh and below, where the illumination of Hochma is revealed. Nukva is called “world,” and the Creator prepares her. “By His wisdom” is Tzedek , as it is written, “And He will judge the world with justice.” In a Zivug for extending illumination of Hochma, Nukva is called “justice,” and ZA “sentence.” “By His wisdom” is justice, to prepare the Nukva for being justice  through the Zivug of Tzedek and sentence, as it is written, “And He will sentence the world in justice.”
It explains what is written of the Zivugim of Tzadik  and Tzedek. The verse, “He makes the earth by His power” explains the Zivug of the Tzadik because “By His power is Tzadik ,” which is the Zivug for giving Hassadim. The verse, “Prepares the world by His wisdom” explains the Zivug called Tzedek, since “By His wisdom” is Tzedek. However, that Zivug of Tzedek is only for preparation, Hochma without Hassadim, and the Nukva cannot receive Hochma without Hassadim. Therefore, she needs to be further complemented by a Zivug of the Tzadik for reception of Hassadim. This is why it is written, “Prepares the world by His wisdom,” which is only for preparation.
“Makes the earth” is the Creator, who corrects the earth and mends her ways. He corrects her by His power. The verse explains “Makes the earth” in regard to doing, who is the Creator above, who makes the earth by the Zivug from Chazeh and above. It explains the words, “Makes the earth,” in relation to the act, which is the Creator who corrects the earth and mends her ways. The act is a correction so she may illuminate with the Hochma she received by the giving of Hassadim from the Zivug from Chazeh and above.
386) There are connections by which all 22 letters are connected as one. They are two letters, each of which ties all 22 letters as one. One ascends and one descends. The one that ascended descends, and the one that descended ascended, as it is written, as in Aleph-Chaf Bet-Chaf Aleph-Lamed .
He continues to explain the two Zivugim Tzadik and Tzedek in the verse, “He makes the earth by His power,” as they are two Yesodot, since the male Yesod is Tzadik, and the female Yesod is Tzedek. This is why he calls them “two letters,” since Yesod is called a “letter.” The 22 letters are the ten Sefirot of the structure of the Partzuf, which also divide by the number 22 letters in a way that the 22 letters are the whole of the Partzuf entirely.
The Sefira Yesod of the Partzuf includes the entire Partzuf, connecting all the elements of the Partzuf into one connection. This is why it was said, “There are connections by which all 22 letters are connected as one,” which are the Yesodot  of each Partzuf, connecting all the elements of the Partzuf, which are 22 letters, and making them one whole by a Zivug.
There are two letters, two Yesodot, Tzadik and Tzedek, one ascending and one descending. The Zivug in the male Yesod—called Tzadik—for extending Hassadim is only VAK, whose illumination is considered as only from below upward because only the illumination of GAR illuminates from above downward. It follows that the illumination of the Zivug de Hassadim from Tzadik is ascending, illuminating from below upward. This is why it was said, “One ascends.”
The illumination of the Zivug de Hochma that extends in Yesod de Nukva, Tzedek—as she is GAR—illuminates from above downward. It is considered that its illumination descends to all the lower ones. This is why it was said, “And one descends.”
It is known that once the level of Hassadim has been revealed in the Zivug of the Tzadik, the Zivug of Tzadik and Tzedek was made as one and they were included in one another. Tzadik was included in the illumination of Hochma in Tzedek and has GAR, and Tzedek was included in the Hassadim in the Tzadik, and her Hochma clothes in Hassadim. Through that Zivug, the Hassadim in Tzadik now illuminate from above downward because they now have GAR by the Hitkalelut with Tzedek. Also, for the Hochma in Tzedek to be able to clothe in Hassadim, she now illuminates only from above downward.
The one that ascended descends, and the one that descended ascended. It is so because the illumination of Hassadim from Tzadik, whose illumination first rose from below upward, now—through his Hitkalelut with Tzedek—his illumination descends from above downward to the lower ones. Also, the illumination of Hochma, whose illumination previously descended from above downward, now after her Hitkalelut in Tzadik, her illumination ascends from below upward and she does not expand below to the lower ones.
It is written, “Only in you is God” . Aleph-Lamed  is the name of the Hesed whose illumination descends to the lower ones. Hence, “In you is God” means in Israel, since the light of Hassadim descends into the lower ones. However, it is written, “Only,” in diminution, diminishing the illumination of Hochma. The meaning of the words is “Only in you is God” and not the light of Hochma. This explains the words, “Makes the earth by His power” is righteous , for through the Tzadik, the Nukva receives complete making. “Prepares the earth by His wisdom” is Tzedek , mating for Tzedek only for preparation. But in the end the Zivug of Tzadik and his Tzedek is made, and then the correction of the Nukva is complete.
387) The pivot of the balance  stands in the middle, as it is written, “You shall do no wrong in judgment, in the meter, in weight, or in measure.” Weight means that the pivot of the balance stands in the middle, since then the weight is just. It is written, “By the shekel of the sanctuary,” and the balances stand in it, in the pivot of the balance, standing in the middle. The Mochin are weighed, hence they are called “Shekel  of the sanctuary.” The balance is that in which the Mochin are weighed, the balance of Tzedek , by which the Tzedek is weighed and all the Mochin stand in the weight in the shekel of the sanctuary.
Explanation: All the Mochin come out and appear in the balance and in the weight, which are three points, Holam, Shuruk, Hirik. The letters Mem-Yod  are Holam, the right scalepan, Hassadim, and the letters Aleph-Lamed-Hey  are Shuruk, the left scalepan, illumination of Hochma. Before the level of Hassadim appear at the point of Hirik, the two scalepans are in dispute: once the right one prevails, the pan of Hassadim ascends, and the pan of Hochma descends, and once the left pan prevails, the pan of Hochma ascends, and the pan of Hassadim descends.
This continues until the middle line, Hassadim, appears at the Masach of the point of Hirik. Then a decision is made, Hochma clothes in Hassadim, Hassadim in Hochma, and both illuminate together. Therefore, that level is regarded as the point of Hirik, where the balance pivot stands in the middle before when the balance pivot stands in the middle, the justness of the weight is made, and the two scalepans stand one opposite the other equally. In this way, all the Mochin come out, as was said above, for there is no seed that is sown for Mochin unless by the three sowings Holam, Shuruk, Hirik.
This disagrees with what was said, “The one who ascended descends, and the one who descended ascended,” for by the middle line that decides between them, the illumination of Hassadim spreads below, and not the illumination of Hochma. Considering the shekel of the sanctuary that was said about the Mochin, it means that the two pans of the scales illuminate equally, that the pivot of the balance stands in the middle and the right pan no longer overcomes the left pan.
If My Covenant Is Not Day and Night
388) “By the word of the Lord were the heavens made; and all the host of them by the breath of His mouth.” These are the lower heaven from Chazeh de ZA and below, which were made by the word of the upper heaven from Chazeh de ZA and above, which were made by the wind that emits a sound until it reaches that river that stretches out, whose waters never stop.
The heaven is ZA. From Chazeh and above it is considered “the upper heaven,” and from Chazeh and below, “the lower heaven.” It is known that from Chazeh and below it has no correction in its place, but must rise and be included in the Zivug from Chazeh and above, called “upper heaven.” The lower heaven, from Chazeh de ZA and below, were made by the word of the upper heaven. When ZA is in Katnut, he is called Ruach , and in Gadlut he is called “voice.” It was said that they were “Made by the wind that emits a sound,” meaning that the Ruach de ZA obtained Mochin de Gadlut. This is the first Gadlut. Afterwards he obtained the second Gadlut from AVI, which is why it was said that he reaches that river that stretches out, AVI, whose Zivug never stops.
“And all the host of them by the breath of His mouth” applies to all the lower ones below ZON de Atzilut, standing only in the light of Ruach, who did not obtain the sound, male. They receive covered Hassadim from the male because covered Hassadim are ascribed to the male, and Hochma is ascribed to the female. And since all the lower ones need Hochma, covered Hassadim are regarded for them as VAK without GAR.
That is, in ZON themselves the Mochin are in the shekel of the sanctuary, when Hochma and Hassadim illuminate equally. This is only from Chazeh de ZA and below. But in all the hosts below ZON de Atzilut, which stand in BYA, they receive only Ruach from Hochma, meaning an illumination from below upward, as it was said, “And the one who descended ascended,” and only the Hassadim descends upon them, as it was said, “And the one who ascended descends.”
389) “He waters the mountains from His upper chambers, the earth will be satisfied with the fruit of Your works.” Who is “From His upper chambers”? Mountains are HGT de ZON from Chazeh and above. He waters them from His upper chambers, who are upper AVI, receiving from them pure air, covered Hassadim. “The earth will be satisfied with the fruit of Your works” is that river that stretches out downward from Chazeh de ZA, where it imparts illumination of Hochma, in which there is complete satiation. This is why it is written, “The earth will be satisfied,” meaning the Nukva, below Chazeh de ZA, as it is written, “Whose seed is in him,” meaning the seed of Vav is in him.
Let There Be Lights
390) “Let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven.” It is written “lights”  without the Vav. Rabbi Hizkiya says, “‘Lights,’ for the power of Din is in it, and the absorption of the Din.” “Lights” is Malchut, Nukva de ZA. This is why it lacks the Vav, which is the word curse , since there are two Dinim in Malchut: 1) The force of Din that lies in her by the force of Tzimtzum Aleph to not receive Ohr Yashar into her. These Dinim are from her own root. 2) The darkness in her, which she absorbed from Bina. This is why it is called “the absorption of the Din,” for it is not from herself, but from what she absorbed from others.
Rabbi Yosi says, “The reason why it is written ‘lights’ without a Vav, which is the word for ‘curse,’ is that the writing says, ‘Let there be a curse below,’ since the moon, Malchut, on which the death of babies from diphtheria in the lower world depends, and on which curse depends.”
Rabbi Hizkiya interpreted the word “curse” and the matter of the curse above in the world of Atzilut, in Malchut de Atzilut herself—that there is power of Din and absorption of Din in her, herself. Rabbi Yosi says that the meaning is that below, in the lower world, curses and swearing extend from Malchut. And after the swearing below, Malchut is called “lights”  without a Vav. Because it is the smallest of all the lights of Atzilut, the last of all the lights, sometimes she is darkened and does not receive light, hence diphtheria and cursing extend from her downward.
When the degrees diminish by the ascent of Malchut of each degree to the Bina in her, for which Bina and TM of each degree descend to the degree below it, Bina and TM of the degree of Malchut descend to the separated BYA where there are the Klipot because she is the last and smallest light from the whole of Atzilut. Past her there are no degrees of Kedusha at all to which Bina and TM in her may fall.
Because of that diminution, diphtheria extends from her to babies. And because it is the smallest of all the lights of Atzilut, the last of all the lights, sometimes she is darkened and does not receive light because when she is darkened during the diminution, her Bina and TM descend to the separated BYA and give power to the harm-doers and the Klipot.
391) “In the firmament of the heaven” is a firmament that contains everything because it takes all the lights that illuminate into that light that does not illuminate. The firmament of Bina includes all the Mochin of ZON because it is the one that raises the letters ELEH of Bina and returns them to Bina. At that time the ZON, who are attached to them, rise with them to Bina, too, and receive from her the Mochin. This is applied in all the degrees of ZON, which is why the firmament of Bina is regarded as the inclusive firmament, which illuminates to that light that does not illuminate, meaning illuminates to Malchut by raising her to Bina, as it is written, “Let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven.”
392) Rabbi Yitzhak said, “He elicited the firmament that does not illuminate, and he is called ‘the kingdom of heaven,’ ‘the land of Israel,’ and ‘the land of the living.’” All those are names of Malchut because the meaning of the words, “Let there be lights in the firmament” is that by those words the Emanator elicited the firmament that does not illuminate, Malchut, who is Nukva de ZA. This is why the Emanator said, “Let there be lights” without a Vav, since He said that there will be lights in a firmament that will not be able to illuminate.
The heaven is the one who illuminates to that firmament. ZA is called “heaven.” He illuminates to Malchut, the firmament that does not illuminate. This is why it is written, “Let there be lights” without a Vav, indicating that there is no illumination of the heaven in her, called Vav, and when he is without a Vav, death extends from her to the world. Afterwards it is written, “In the firmament of the heaven to illuminate upon the earth.” The heaven are Vav, ZA, and he illuminates to the Nukva, who is called “earth.”
393) “Let there be lights” lacks Vav because everything depends on her. “Let there be lights” also includes the creation of Lilit in the world, hence it is written without a Vav, which is the word for “curse.” It is written, “The small and the great are there.” Malchut includes both Mochin de Katnut and Mochin de Gadlut. It is also written, “Because if there the great Lord will be with us,” meaning the Mochin de Gadlut included in her.
It is written about it, “But there shall Lilit be calm and find repose,” meaning also in Malchut. Thus, everything is included in her, both Katnut and Gadlut, and even the Klipa Lilit, as it is written, “And His kingdom rules over all.” This is why it is written “lights” without a Vav.
394) Rabbi Elazar said, “‘Let there be lights’ without a Vav is Malchut, who is called ‘a mirror that does not illuminate by herself but through the lights above it, which illuminate for it like the glass walls of the lantern, which pick up light from the candle that stands in the midst of them and illuminates outwards. Likewise, the Nukva picks up light from the degrees above her and illuminates to the lower ones, but in her, herself, there is no light at all, like the glass walls of the lantern.
It is written, “Behold the ark of the covenant, the master of the whole earth.” “Behold the ark” is a mirror that does not illuminate, Malchut, Nukva de ZA. The covenant is the illuminating mirror. “Behold the ark” is lights without Vav, Nukva before ZA, called “written Torah,” connects to her. The ark is a box in which to place the written Torah, which is ZA. The covenant is the sun, ZA, who illuminates to the Nukva. Like him, she is called “covenant,” when she is connected to him. This is why she is called in the verse, “The ark of the covenant.”
“The ark of the covenant, the master of the whole earth.” It is so precisely because only then is the ark of the covenant—only during the connection with ZA, who is called “covenant”—is called “master of the whole earth” like her husband ZA. The covenant, ZA, is called “master of the whole earth.”
395) That ark is a master because the sun, which illuminates to her and to the entire world, is called so, and from it the Nukva takes the name “master.” That ark is called by the name “master,” by the name ADNI, as it is said Tzadik about a male and Tzedek about a female. Likewise, “master” is the name of the male and ADNI is the name of the female.
It is so because as the name Tzedek of the Nukva derives from the name of the male, Tzadik, the name ADNI of the Nukva derives from the name of the male, Adon . Hence, when the female is named completely after her husband, the name “ark of the covenant,” she is called by the name of the male, Adon .
396) Stars and signs stand in a covenant, which is the sun, ZA. This is the firmament of the heaven in the verse, “Let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven.” “Let there be lights” is the Nukva, and “The firmament of the heaven” is ZA, who illuminates to her, to the stars, to the signs, and to the whole world. The stars and the signs are inscribed and engraved in the firmament, and hang in it to illuminate on the earth.
It follows that Rabbi Yitzhak interpreted the name “firmament” to mean the Nukva, Rabbi Yosi interpreted the name “firmament” to mean Yesod of Bina, and Rabbi Elazar interprets “Let there be lights” to mean the Nukva, “In the firmament of the heaven,” meaning ZA.
Old Rabbi Yisa says, “The Emanator said, ‘Let there be lights,’ for it to be hanging in the firmament of the heaven, so all the qualities of her illumination will be hanging in the firmament of the heaven. Here, by saying ‘Let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven,’ the Emanator corrected that all the levels will be hanging in the firmament of the heaven, which is the Parsa, by whose ascent from below Hochma He measures the level of Ruach to the degree, and by whose descent below Bina He measures the level of Neshama, by his descent below Tifferet He measures the level of Haya, and by his descent to Malchut He measures the level of Yechida.”
“Lights” is the moon that is hanging in all its levels in the firmament, since it is written, “And let them be for lights in the firmament of the heaven.” Thus, the sun was also hung in the firmament. And when it is written, “And let them be for signs and for seasons,” then all the levels that come out in occasions, festivals, and beginnings of months and Sabbaths are hanging and are made in the firmament, which measures the levels of each degree.
397) All the levels that the firmament measures are made in the work of the first, uppermost firmament, in which the holy name is unified, and which is everything. The firmament in the Peh of AA, which elicited Bina and TM de AA outside the Rosh, is the first, uppermost firmament in the worlds, and in it the holy name Elokim is unified. It is so because by its descent from Peh to Chazeh de AA, it raises the letters ELEH to Rosh AA, which connect with the letters MI, completing the name Elokim. It is everything because it includes within it all the lower lights. That firmament is called “seven firmaments.”
Seven stars correspond to seven firmaments, and all are leaders of the world, and the upper world above them. A firmament means the new Sium , made by Tzimtzum Bet by Malchut’s ascent to Bina. There is an operator and an operation in that, which are called “star” and “firmament.” The operator of the Sium is called a “star.” The operation of Sium itself is called a “firmament.” The upper firmament in the Peh of AA is called “seven firmaments,” opposite HGT NHY, who is superior to them and includes them within it. Therefore, there are seven stars in them because the operating force of each of the seven firmaments is called a “star.”
However, this applies only to the operator and the operation of Tzimtzum Bet. But the operating force of Tzimtzum Aleph is not called a “star,” hence the stars needed to control only Bina, who was restricted only in Tzimtzum Bet. But in Malchut, who was restricted back in Tzimtzum Aleph, the stars do not need to govern there and rule over her. But because of the association of Malchut in Bina, Malchut was established in all the corrections of Bina, hence the stars operate in Malchut as in Bina.
All seven stars lead the lower world, Malchut, and the upper world is over them. The upper world, which is Bina, is founded on them, on the stars, and not the lower world, Malchut, in whom there is the force of the Tzimtzum, and who is not even considered a star. For this reason, the lower world is led by the stars, too.
There are two worlds: the upper world, Bina, and the lower world, Malchut. The lower one, Malchut, was established similar to the upper one, Bina, hence all the corrections of the upper world apply to the lower world, and the lower world is also led by the stars, like the upper one, as it is written, “From the world and to the world,” indicating that all that there is in the upper world passed and was established in the lower world. The upper world is the upper king, Bina; the lower world is the lower king, Malchut.
398) It is written, “The Lord is king, the Lord was king, the Lord will be king forever and ever.” “The Lord is king” above; “The Lord was king” in the middle; “The Lord will be king” below. Interpreting, “The Lord was king” in past tense is the upper world, the next world, Bina. “The Lord is king” in present tense is Tifferet Israel , ZA. “The Lord will be king” in future tense is the ark of the covenant, the lower world, Malchut.
Bina preceded the creation of the world. Therefore she is implied in past tense, “The Lord was king,” with a Mem with Kamatz. In the present, the world is led by ZA, where HGT NHY are in the 6,000 years. This is why it is implied in the present tense, “The Lord is king,” with a Mem with Segol. However, the Nukva, Malchut, has not yet been revealed in the world in wholeness, but is gradually corrected until the end of correction. For this reason, her kingship is implied in the future tense, “The Lord will be king.” Here he brings it as support to what he said, “The upper king is Bina and the lower king is Malchut.”
399) David came at another time and returned them from below upward. He said, “The Lord is king forever and ever.” “The Lord is King” means below, in the lower world, Malchut. A world means in the middle, in ZA. “And ever” means above, in Bina, where there is the convening, the unification and the Mochin and completion of all the degrees.
“Was king” is above. Hence, the upper world, Bina, is called “Was king,” with a Mem with Kamatz, indicating that her establishing has been fully completed. But “Will be king” is below. “Will be king” indicates that he is destined to receive the completeness of the kingship below, meaning the lower world, Malchut, who has not been completed.
We could ask, “How did David say, ‘The Lord is king’ below, being called ‘king’ with a Mem with Segol?” It is so because Malchut is called “king” in the present, according to what she receives from her husband, ZA, who is called Melech  with a Mem with Segol. Therefore, she is named so only after her husband, while in and of herself, her kingship has not been revealed. Rather, it will be revealed at the end of correction. In that respect, she is called “Will be king.”
400) All those illuminations connect in the firmament of the heaven, as it is written, “And God placed them in the firmament of the heaven to illuminate on the earth.” Who is the firmament that illuminates on the earth? It is the river that stretches out of Eden, as it is written, “And a river came out of Eden to water the garden.” Bina came out of Eden, Hochma, to give Mochin to Malchut, who is called “garden.” Thus, the firmament is Bina, which illuminates on the earth, the garden, and all the illuminations, which are the Mochin de ZON, connect in her, meaning they come out and extend from her.
401) Because the moon rules and illuminates by the force of the river that stretches out of Eden, Bina, all those heaven below Atzilut—the separated BYA and their hosts—light is added in all of them. And the stars that are appointed over the world to guide it all rule, and plants and trees grow. Also, everything that is in the world multiplies and grows, and even the water and the fish in the sea are in great greatness.
Several emissaries of the Din fly in the world because everyone is in joy and great strength, and they, too, increase their power through the domination of Malchut, hence they are more likely to harm than ever. When there is joy in the king’s house, even the guards of the gate and the guards of the roads are all happy and wander in the world. Therefore, the infants in the world should beware of the harm-doers.
402) “And God placed them in the firmament of the heaven,” when they are all standing in it when the sun and moon are both in the firmament of the heaven, in Bina. Then they rejoice with one another. At that time the moon diminished herself before the sun, and since then everything that the sun, ZA, takes is only to illuminate to the Nukva, and not for himself. This is the meaning of what is written, “To illuminate on the earth.”
ZA is the sun. The Nukva, earth, is the moon. When it is written, “And God placed them in the firmament of the heaven,” the Nukva is at the same degree as ZA, and both receive from the firmament of the heaven. Afterwards it is written, “To illuminate on the earth.” Nukva is called “earth,” hence the Nukva is below ZA and receives only from the sun, ZA. Therefore, initially both ZA and Nukva stood in the firmament of the heaven, and both were at the same level, receiving together from the firmament of the heaven, from Bina. Afterwards the Nukva was diminished and was made below ZA, receiving from him. This is why afterwards it is written, “To illuminate on the earth.”
403) It is written, “And the light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun, and the light of the sun shall be sevenfold, as the light of the seven days.” The seven days are the seven days of creation, HGT NHYM de ZA. Accordingly it is written of the future , “And the light of the sun shall be as the light of the moon,” in the future. At that time the light of the sun will be sevenfold, as the measure of the seven Sefirot that were established in the days of creation. It follows that in the future the sun and the moon will be equal.
However, the light of the seven days means during the days of the fillings, the time of the Sefirot HGT NHYM de Nukva, once they are filled with all their filling in the future. At that time her Sefirot are called “days of filling.” Accordingly, it is necessarily written of the future, “And the light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun” of now. “And the light of the sun,” in the future, “Will be sevenfold” in its size, as the light of the seven Sefirot HGT NHYM de Nukva in the future. It follows that even after the end of correction the levels of ZA and Nukva will not be equal, but ZA will then be sevenfold higher than the level of the Nukva.
404) At that time the Sefirot of the Nukva are regarded as days of filling because at that time the world will be mitigated and will return to its perfection, and the Nukva will no longer be diminished by the flaw of the evil serpent, of whom it is written, “And a whisperer separates the champion,” separating the unification of ZON. For this reason, at that time her Sefirot are called “days of filling.” This will be when the Nukva is filled and there is no diminution in her at all. It will be at a time of which it is written, “Shall swallow up death forever,” when the Sitra Achra and death are cancelled forever. At that time it is written, “On that day the Lord will be one and His name, One.” However, at the end of correction there will be two times for the Nukva, too. First, the Nukva will be corrected with ZA on an equal level, and then in one below the other.
Let the Waters Swarm
405) “Let the waters swarm with swarms of living souls ” is the lower waters, which beget Nefashot , like the upper waters, Bina, which beget the Neshamot  of ZON. Likewise, the lower waters, ZON, beget the souls  of the righteous. The upper waters beget the upper Neshamot, ZON, and the lower waters beget the Neshamot of the lower ones, the souls of the righteous.
Rabbi Hiya said, “The upper ones elicited a living soul , the Nefesh of Adam HaRishon, as it is written, “And the man became a living soul.” Nefashot of people come out from ZON, who are the lower waters. Rabbi Hiya calls the ZON “upper waters” because ZON cannot elicit souls of people before they rise and clothe AVI, who are upper waters, and the lower one ascends to the upper one and becomes like him. Hence, at that time Rabbi Hiya regards the ZON as upper water like AVI.
406) “And let fowl fly above the earth.” “And let fowl fly” are upper emissaries, angels that appear to people in the appearance of a person. This is implied by what is written, “Let fowl fly above the earth,” indicating that they appear as the image of the dwellers of the earth because there are other angels who are seen only in spirit, prior to the perceptions of people’s minds. This is why it is written here, “Above the earth,” indicating that they are not so, but are perceived in the image of people.
There are angels that extend from the side of Malchut, from Chazeh de ZA and below. It is written about them, “And let fowl fly above the earth,” since the earth is Malchut, and they appear to people as the appearance of a person. There are also angels who extend from Chazeh de ZA and above. These are seen only as spirits, prior to the perceptions of people’s minds, since the bodies of people have no root in ZA, and the angels that extend from his side cannot clothe in the image of the body.
407) Because they change their form to clothe in the bodies of people, it is not written about them, “And every winged fowl after its kind,” like those other angels who extend from ZA. It is so because those who extend from ZA never change their kinds and do not change to clothe in people’s bodies like those other angels, of whom it is not written, “After its kind,” but is rather written about them, “And let fowl fly above the earth,” and it is not written, “After its kind.”
Among the angels themselves there are those who differ from one another. That is, there are many degrees among them. This is why it is written, “And from there it parted,” since that Parsa below Atzilut, of which it is written, “And from there it parted”—meaning that from there down are the three separated worlds BYA in which there are the angels—that Parsa makes many degrees in them.
And God Created the Sea Monsters
408) “And God created the great sea monsters,” which are the leviathan  and his mate. The leviathan is Yesod de Gadlut de ZA. “And every living soul  that creeps” is the Nefesh of that animal that creeps to the four directions of the world. Romeset  is like Romeset , who tramples and destroys toward all the directions in the world. The animal that creeps is Lilit.
409) “With which the waters swarmed after their kind,” since the waters raise them. This applies to the leviathan and his mate, who are raised by the waters because when the Southern wind comes, the waters open up from their freezing through the Northern wind and extend to every direction. The ships of the sea go and pass along, as it is written, “There go the ships, a leviathan, whom You have created to sport in it.” Thus, the leviathan is raised by the waters.
410) “And every winged fowl after its kind.” Those angels, of whom it is written, “For the fowl of the heaven will carry the voice,” are angels that extend from ZA, who is called “voice.” They all have six wings and they never change themselves. They have six wings because they extend from ZA, corresponding his HGT NHY. Also, they do not change since they do not clothe in a body because there is no root for a Guf  in ZA. This is why it is written, “After its kind,” the kind of above, the kind from Chazeh de ZA and above where there is no root to the Guf at all. Hence, they do not change themselves to clothe in a body.
They fly and roam in the world in six flights, corresponding to the HGT NHY in them. They see the works of people and raise them up to the courthouse of above. This is why it is written, “Even in your thought, do not curse a king,” meaning the king of the world, since the fowl of the heaven, being the angels, will lead the voice up.
411) It is written, “Creeps.” Should it not have written “Swarms,” as it is written, “With which the water swarms”? However, as we say “The night has crept,” meaning that the night has darkened, and as it is written, “In it all the beasts of the forest creep.” “In it” means at night, in Malchut. All the forces of the darkness, which are the beasts of the forest, rule at night. Hence, “Every living soul  that creeps” means Malchut. They all rule during the night, when the Nukva rules, since Malchut includes all that is below her, even the Klipot.
The angels start to sing in three watches by which the night divides. They chant songs and do not stop. It is written about those angels, “You who mention the Lord, do not be silent.”
Let Us Make Man
412) When the Creator wished to make the man, all the upper ones and lower ones were shaken because all the worlds depend on his works, for worse or for better. It follows that the creation of man concerned everyone. This is why they were shaken; they feared he might sin. That sixth day was ascending in its degrees until the upper one wished it and the beginning of all the lights illuminated.
413) He opened the Eastern gate because from there the light comes out to illuminate to the world. It is so because all actions must be in the order of the emanation of the Partzufim of ZON. They must be repeated in their Zivug for begetting a Neshama. The order of the emanation of the Partzufim of ZON is presented with a few words: “Three come out of one; one is rewarded with three.” It means that first ZA rises for MAN to YESHSUT and decides there between right and left of YESHSUT at the level of Hassadim, which come out there on the Masach de Hirik, then the three of them are included in one another, and three Mochin HBD come out in YESHSUT.
Three, HBD de YESHSUT, come out of one, ZA, since by subduing the two lines there those three Mochin illuminated there. Therefore, one—ZA—is rewarded with three, as he also stands in those three Mochin HBD because the lower one is rewarded with the full measure of illumination it causes in the upper one.
Thus, ZON must traverse that whole path anew in order to beget the soul of Adam HaRishon. First, ZA must rise to YESHSUT for MAN and decide between the right and left in them. That ascent of ZA to YESHSUT is ascribed primarily to Yesod de ZA because he is the carrier of Masach de Hirik.
The sixth day, Yesod de ZA, ascends in his degrees for MAN by the will of the upper one, YESHSUT, and decides there between the right and left of YESHSUT. By his decision, the three Mochin HBD appear in them because three come out of one. It follows that the beginning of all the lights illuminated because those three Mochin HBD that came out in YESHSUT by the decision of ZA are the first Mochin of illumination of Hochma that appear in the worlds. It is so because Hochma de AA was concealed and does not illuminate to the Partzufim of Atzilut, and all the illumination of Hochma that illuminates in Atzilut is only from Bina that returned to being Hochma, YESHSUT.
Thus, these Mochin that came out in YESHSUT and were completed through the decision of ZA are the first Mochin in the whole of the world of Atzilut. Afterwards ZA himself was also rewarded with those three Mochin because one is rewarded with three. By that the Eastern gate opens, meaning that ZA, who is called “east,” opens to illuminate in three Mochin, like YESHSUT, because from YESHSUT, the light comes out to ZA.
Here we must remember that the four directions of the world are monikers to the four Behinot HB TM. In ZON, they are HG TM: south is right, Hesed; north is left, Gevura; east is ZA, Tifferet, middle line; and west is Nukva de ZA, Malchut, who receives from the three lines—south, north, and east.
South, the right, Hesed, disclosed the force of his illumination, which he inherited from the Rosh, YESHSUT, and he strengthens in the east, ZA. Once ZA received the Mochin in the three lines from YESHSUT, he extended the right line, Hassadim, for himself, because ZA is essentially covered Hassadim and does not need illumination of Hochma, extended in the left line, north. However, in truth, he extended all three lines—south, north, and east—but the right line, south, grew strong in its dominion and covered and concealed the other lights. That is, it prevailed in its dominion and cancelled the others.
The east, ZA, attacked the north, re-disclosing in itself the illumination of the left, which he extended from YESHSUT, the point of Shuruk. The north awakened and expanded inside ZA, and called on the west, Nukva de ZA, with great force to approach and partake with him. Then the west, Nukva, rose to the north and connected in him because the structure of the Nukva is primarily from the left, north. Therefore, ZA awakened the north in him to expand in its full measure and clothe inside the Nukva. He called upon the west with great force. It is with great force because the illumination of the North is with great force, for by his illumination, all the lights of Malchut freeze.
Afterwards the south, right, Hesed, came and clung to the west, the Nukva. It follows that the south and the north—the boundaries of the garden—surround her, since once the Nukva connected to the illumination of the north, the congealed sea, she froze until ZA returned and extended to her the south, the light of Hassadim on the right. At that time the illumination of Hochma on the north clothed in the Hassadim on the south, and her lights were opened to illuminate in the worlds. Besides that, those two lights—south and north—were made, keeping the Nukva from the Klipot and Dinim, since the Southern wind cancels all the Dinim, and the Northern wind subdues all the external ones and the Klipot. For this reason they are regarded as keeping her, like a fence that keeps the garden from strangers.
At that time the east, ZA, mates with the west, Nukva, and the west is in joy. She asked of everyone and said, “Let us make man in our image, after our likeness,” so he will be in this way, in four directions—south, north, east, and west, and above and below, meaning in VAK. Then ZA clings to the Nukva and elicited the soul of Adam HaRishon. This is why Adam came out from the place of the Temple, from Nukva de ZA, who is called “the Temple.”
414) “And God said, ‘Let us make man.’” The Creator said means he extended to the lower ones—who come from the side of the upper ones—the name in the number Adam, the name Mem-Hey (45). The upper ones are YESHSUT, who have only two lines, right and left, in Holam and Shuruk, which are MI ELEH, and which are concealed. The lower ones are ZON, who have the Masach de Hirik, the Masach of the name MA , at the level of Hassadim that comes out on that Masach. It decides between the right and left of YESHSUT, and YESHSUT open from their concealing and three Mochin HBD come out in them, three come out of one.
Because of it the ZON are awarded those Mochin, too, because the lower one is rewarded with the full measure that it causes in the upper one. It was said, “One is rewarded with three.” This is the lower ones who come from the side of the upper ones.
In and of themselves, ZON are unfit for Mochin. But because they caused the elicitation of Mochin above, in YESHSUT, they were also rewarded with them. This is why it is considered that the Mochin of ZON come from the upper ones and not from themselves.
As the Mochin de ZON were emanated from YESHSUT, the soul of Adam HaRishon is emanated from ZON. Once ZON receive the Mochin from YESHSUT and from AVI, and rise to them and clothe, they become completely equal to the degree of AVI and YESHSUT. At that time they emanate to Adam HaRishon by all those ways that AVI emanated them, since now ZON are considered upper ones, and the soul of Adam as the lower ones. Hence, first ZON were diminished as YESHSUT, lowering the letters ELEH to the soul of Adam, then they raised them back to their degree, and the soul of Adam HaRishon rose with them.
As with YESHSUT, so now in ZON, two lines were made, right and left, MI ELEH, whose lights were concealed. Now Adam HaRishon has the Masach of the point of Hirik, which is the Masach of the name MA, deciding between the two lines of ZON, and opening them from their concealment. To the extent that the soul of Adam HaRishon caused new Mochin in ZON, he, too, is rewarded with them. It follows that the elicitation of the Mochin to the soul of Adam HaRishon was also like the lower ones that come from the upper ones.
This is the meaning of what the Creator said, “Let us make man,” meaning He extended Mochin to those lower ones who come from the side of the upper ones, which are the lower ones who carry the Masach de Hirik, which are fit to decide between the two lines in the ones above them. They elicit Mochin in the upper ones and are rewarded with them, too. The meaning of that name, which is MA in Gematria, is as the number Adam. The meaning of the middle line, which carries the Masach de Hirik from the name MA, who decides in the upper ones and draws from them to himself, as well, is that by that the entire wholeness in the soul of Adam HaRishon came out and was emanated.
Adam is from the upper concealment, containing within him the two lines from the upper ones, from YESHSUT, right and left, who were concealed prior to the decision of the third line. Also, Adam is the letters, including within him the middle line, who is considered all the lower ones, which are called “letters,” since the upper ones are regarded as Taamim Nekudot, and the lower ones as Otiot . Thus, the man  includes within him all that is above and all that is below.
The three letters are Aleph-Dalet-Mem . The Aleph in the name Adam points upward, to upper AVI, from whom extends the right line, MI. The blocked Mem  in the name Adam is the Mem in the verse, “To the increase of the government,” where although this Mem  is in the middle of the word, it is traditionally written with a final  Mem, as at the end of the word. It implies YESHSUT, from whom the left line, ELEH, extends.
The bottom Dalet in the name Adam is concealed in the west. That Dalet is included in the Nukva from Chazeh de ZA and below, which is called “west.” It implies the Masach de Hirik, which the Nukva, called “west,” carries. Through it, the level of Hassadim comes out, becoming the middle line, and deciding between right, the Aleph of Adam, and left, the Mem of Adam.
This is the whole of the Mochin above and below, since by these three ways the Mochin in YESHSUT and ZON come out. They also come out in the soul of Adam HaRishon. After they were established above in ZON through the subduing of the Masach of Adam, they were also established below in Adam himself, since the lower one is rewarded with all the measure of illumination that it causes above.
415) The letters Aleph Dalet Mem disclosed in ZON new Mochin de HBD when they descended to the soul of Adam HaRishon. They are all as one in their wholeness, in the decision of the middle line and in their Hitkalelut in one another. Thus, man is in male and in female. The Hassadim in the soul are regarded as male, and the Gevurot as female. The female was attached to his side until He cast sleep on him and he slept, and he was laid in the place of the Temple below.
416) The Creator sowed him, meaning separated the female from the male, and fixed her as the bride is fixed. And He brought her to him, and it is written, “And He took one of his ribs,” He took one because he had two ribs, and He took one of them. The rib that He did not take is the first Lilit, who was Adam HaRishon’s first wife, and who has been removed from him.
417) Lilit was not help made against him, as it is written, “And for the man He did not find a help made against him,” since she was an evil Klipa and He did not trust her. She was with him until that time, as it is written, “It is not good for the man to be alone, I shall make him a help made against him,” for then she was removed from him. Adam was the last of the creations, hence a whole man had to come to the world. This is why Lilit was removed from him and Eve was given to him in her stead.
For He Did Not Shower Rain
418) “And no shrub of the field was yet in the earth ... for the Lord had not showered rain upon the earth.” “And no shrub of the field” are large trees after they were planted but were still small. “And no shrub of the field was yet” does not mean that they did not exist but that they were still small.
419) Adam and Eve were created side by side. Why weren’t they created face-to-face? It is because it is written, “For the Lord had not showered rain upon the earth,” and the Zivug de ZON was not yet as it should be. When Adam and Eve of below were established and were returned to face-to-face, they were established as face-to-face above, as well.
First, Adam and Eve were two Partzufim because Eve was regarded as Adam’s left line and was not a Partzuf in and of herself, since the Zivug of ZON, who beget them was still incomplete, as it is written, “For the Lord had not showered rain upon the earth,” meaning that the Zivug of ZON was still not in its place. This is so because the Lord is ZA, earth is his Nukva, and ZON were not established face-to-face before Adam and Eve were established face-to-face.
The reason for it is that there are two Iburim  for each degree. In the first Ibur he obtains VAK without a Rosh, and in the second Ibur he obtains the Gadlut. In the first Ibur, each upper one raises its lower one to it and corrects it. But in the second Ibur the lower one rises to its upper one by itself, by raising MAN. It is so because the first Ibur occurs when the upper one obtains the first Gadlut, which is still not PBP , but in Mochin de Achoraim, which returns to it the letters ELEH that fell from it. They come with its lower one for then the lower one rises along with them because it is attached to the letters ELEH. Thus, in the first Ibur, the upper one raises the lower one.
Once the lower one receives Katnut there and wishes to receive the Mochin, it then rises for MAN to the upper one by itself. By that, the upper one mates and extends the second Gadlut, correcting the upper one with a Zivug PBP, giving Mochin to the lower one. Thus, as long as the lower one did not rise for MAN to the upper one to receive there the Mochin of PBP, the upper one is in Mochin de Achoraim, too. And because the lower one is the cause and the reason for the elicitation of the Mochin de PBP in the upper one, it is considered that the lower one precedes the upper one because the spiritual first and next mean cause and consequence.
420) How do we know that? We learn it from the tabernacle, as it is written, “The tabernacle was erected,” indicating that another tabernacle was erected along with it, a tabernacle of above, which is the Nukva. The tabernacle above was not erected before the tabernacle below was erected. Here, too, when it was erected below, when Adam and Eve obtained PBP, it was erected above, meaning ZON of above obtained the PBP. And because it was still not established above, meaning that ZON were still not established in PBP, Adam and Eve were still not created PBP.
He proves that ZON were still not PBP, as it is written, “For the Lord God had not showered rain upon the earth,” indicating that they did not have a Zivug PBP because “The Lord God” is ZA, and earth is the Nukva. For this reason the text ends, “And there is no man,” meaning that it was not as it should be, PBP, but in two Partzufim.
421) When Eve was completed, when she was sowed off and was established with him PBP, Adam was completed. Adam was not completed prior to that because Eve is regarded as the lower one compared to Adam, hence she is the reason for the elicitation of Adam’s Mochin. Thus far the letter Samech was not written in the portion because Samech indicates the Nukva, and she was not yet included in Adam, in two Partzufim.
The reason why it was said, “Thus far the letter Samech was not written in the portion,” and it was not said, “In the Torah,” is that in the previous portion there is the letter Samech, as it is written, “Sovev  the whole earth,” and only in this portion of Adam’s creation there is no Samech until it is written, “And closed  flesh in her stead.”
Although Adam HaRishon had a Nukva before Eve was established, whose name was the first Lilit, meaning that he had a Samech before Eve was created, but Samech means assistance, the assistance of ZON above, once they were returned to PBP. It is so because then PBP are considered that the male and female became adjacent to one another, strengthening one another, for as the Nukva is strengthened by ZA with the light of Hassadim, ZA is strengthened by the Nukva with the illumination of Hochma.
It is written, “Adjacent forever and ever, made in truth and uprightness.” “Adjacent,” since the male and female are adjacent to each other, PBP. This explains that Lilit was not called Samech because she did not cause assistance above, meaning Mochin de PBP.
422) “For the Lord God had not showered rain upon the earth,” meaning that ZON were still not PBP because one supported the other. ZON PBP support Adam and Eve to be PBP. Likewise, Adam and Eve PBP support the ZON to be PBP. The lower world, Adam and Eve, dwellers of this world, when it was established and Adam and Eve were returned to being PBP and were established, the Samech was above, and ZON, too, were returned to being PBP.
Prior to it, before ZON returned to being PBP, the work below was not as it should be. That is, the work and construction of Adam and Eve PBP could not be carried out because “The Lord God had not showered rain upon the earth,” meaning that ZON were still not PBP.
Thus, they are dependent on each other. ZON are dependent on the PBP of Adam and Eve, and vice versa—Adam and Eve are dependent on ZON. The PBP de ZON are dependent only on Adam’s raising of MAN, and the PBP of Adam are dependent on the Mochin of PBP of ZON. The Mochin of PBP of ZON necessarily precede the PBP of Adam and Eve, but because Adam’s MAN is the reason for the elicitation of Mochin de PBP de ZON, they are regarded as preceding because first and next in spirituality, where there is no time, mean cause and consequence.
423) “And a mist went up from the earth.” This is the correction of below, of the man, which precedes the PBP of ZON. Afterwards, “And watered the whole of the face of the ground,” when PBP of ZON came out. ZA watered Malchut, the ground, since “And a mist went up from the earth” means that the craving of Nukva will rise to the male, for the raising of MAN of the lower one to the upper one is considered the female’s craving for the male.
Each upper and lower are male and female, and the lower one is considered Nukva compared to its upper one. Also, raising MAN is considered her craving because it rises only by the force of the craving. “And a mist went up from the earth” means that MAN rises from the Nukva, from the lower man, considered Nukva in relation to ZON, his upper one, and then the PBP of ZON come out, “And watered the whole of the face of the ground.”
What is the reason that he did not shower rain? It is because ZON were not PBP because there still wasn’t the correction of which it is written, “And a mist went up from the earth,” meaning that Adam had not raised MAN to ZON, and without Adam’s MAN, the Mochin de PBP of ZON do not come out. For this reason, the work of PBP awakened in ZON from the lower earth, from Adam and Eve.
424) Smoke rises from the earth first, and the cloud awakens. Afterwards everything connects to one another. It is similar to the rising of MAN from what is customary in this world in pouring down of rains. First, mist and smoke rise up from the earth, from below upward. From them, clouds awaken above, which bring down the rains from above downward.
Similarly, the smoke of the offering that is burned on the altar awakens and ascends in the raising of MAN from below upward in ZON, and makes wholeness above. The Mochin PBP come in them, which are the wholeness of the ZON, and everything connects to one another—the Mochin de PBP come out and mate PBP, both above and below.
Similarly, above—in the upper ones themselves—the awakening always begins from the lower to the upper, and then everything is completed. Above, too, each lower degree raises MAN to its adjacent upper one, and the upper one to the one above it. Everyone raises MAN, first up to the highest one, then the abundance is poured from Ein Sof from above downward and descends from degree to degree, from each upper one to its lower one until they come down.
Thus, in relation to MAN, each lower one precedes its upper one. In relation to MAD, the Mochin imparted from above, each upper one precedes its lower one. If the Assembly of Israel, the Nukva, was not initially in awakening, ZA would not awaken opposite her above. By the craving below, it was completed above.
This gives the reason for the necessity to raise MAN for Mochin. We should understand it from the Nukva with ZA, where ZA is covered Hassadim and never awakens for Hochma like the Bina, but the Nukva needs illumination of Hochma. It follows that as long as the Nukva does not raise MAN to ZA, ZA has no need to extend Mochin from AA. But following the Nukva’s raising of MAN he extends the Mochin of illumination of Hochma from AA for her and they obtain the Mochin de PBP.
This reason is sufficient for all the degrees of Atzilut because they are all in Hassadim, and only the Nukva needs illumination of Hochma. Afterwards, for the birth of ZON, ZON rise to the degree of AVI and the Nukva becomes like Ima, in covered Hassadim. Now it follows that only the lower Eve needs illumination of Hochma instead of the Nukva de ZA needing illumination of Hochma. For this reason the Mochin of Adam are now dependent on Eve, who awakens her upper one, Adam, to raise MAN to ZON for extending illumination of Hochma. Likewise are ZON toward their upper ones etc., until the extension of abundance from Ein Sof.
425) Why is it written, “And the tree of life inside the garden, and the tree of knowledge of good and evil,” if the tree of knowledge is not in the middle of the garden? Rather, the tree of life is 500 years away, and all the waters of Beresheet divide under it. It is 500 years away because the tree of life is right in the middle of the garden, regarded as the middle line, hence it includes and imparts of the five Sefirot in Bina—each of which is a hundred—to the garden, Malchut, year. This is the meaning of the tree of life being 500 years away, that it walks and gives the five Sefirot KHB TM in Bina to the year, the Malchut and the garden. Also, it takes all the waters of Beresheet, all the Mochin in Bina that returned to Hochma, who is called Resheet, and they divide below it.
426) Why are all the waters of Beresheet divided under the tree of life? After all, that river that stretches out of Eden, Bina, is on the garden and enters it. That is, the Mochin that the tree of life illuminates in the garden are from the river, from Bina, and from Bina the waters divide into several sides because the Mochin do not illuminate in Bina but in the three points Holam, Shuruk, Hirik, which are the division of the Mochin into three sides right, left, and middle. The garden takes all three sides in the Mochin, then they come out and are imparted from her to the lower ones, and divide into several streams below.
As the garden received the Mochin in the division into three sides—right, left, and middle—when it imparts to the lower ones, they receive by the division into three sides, as well, as it is written, “Will satiate all the beasts of the forest,” where each of the lower ones receives from its corresponding Behina in the Mochin of the Nukva.
The Mochin come out from the upper world, Bina, where they come out in three sides and Bina waters the Mochin to those upper mountains of the pure persimmon, which are HGT de Bina. Afterwards, when they reach there from HGT de Bina to the tree of life, ZA, the Mochin, too, divide into every side according to its way—right, left, and middle. Therefore, they also divide so in the garden, which receives from the tree of life, and also in BYA, who receive from the garden.
427) The tree of knowledge of good and evil is in the middle, between the good, right, and the evil, left. Why is it called so if that tree is not in the middle but leans to the left more than to the right? It is so because it sucks from both sides, right and left. It knows those to whom it clings, like one who sucks from the sweet and from the bitter. And because it sucks from both sides and knows them, as it clings to them and is in them it is called “good and evil.”
This is why the Nukva is called “the tree of knowledge of good and evil,” since there are two points in the Nukva: one is mitigated by Bina, who is good, and one is not mitigated in and of herself, and she is bad. She suckles from both of them together, which is why she is called “the tree of knowledge of good and evil.”
428) All the plantings, the Sefirot of Malchut, are on the two points good and evil because those points are the Yesod of Nukva, who is below all the Sefirot. Also, other plantings, upper ones—HGT NHY de ZA—grip to it, from whom the Nukva is built during her Gadlut. They are called “The cedars of Lebanon.” The cedars of Lebanon are those six upper days, the six days of Beresheet, as it is written, “The cedars of Lebanon that he had planted,” for they are certainly plantations, as they existed after they were uprooted from their places and were planted elsewhere.
429 Henceforth Samech is written in the portion, the Samech in the words, “And closed flesh in her stead.” That is, since then Eve was discerned as support. First Eve was attached to his side, and they were attached side by side. Certainly, the Creator uprooted them, as it is written, “And He took one of his ribs” and planted them elsewhere, in AVI, as it is written, “And the Lord God built the rib.” “The Lord God” is AVI, meaning ZON who clothed them, AVI, and became like them. They raised Eve to them and built her as a special Partzuf PBP, and Adam and Eve returned to being two Partzufim PBP. By that they existed in wholeness.
Prior to the Samech in the verse, “And closed flesh in her stead,” Eve was not considered support to Adam, meaning two Partzufim PBP, but two Partzufim side by side. But once the Creator uprooted Eve, as it is written, “And He took one of his ribs,” henceforth Eve became support because they returned to PBP. This is why the Samech was written promptly after the uprooting, as it is written, “And closed  flesh in her stead.” Likewise, the upper worlds, ZON, were also supported. First they were two Partzufim, and then the Creator, who are upper AVI, uprooted them and raised the Nukva to them, and built it, keeping ZON in a complete existence, meaning in PBP.
430) Adam and Eve are called “plantings,” as it is written, “The offshoot of My plantations, the work of My hands with which to boast.” “The work of My hands” means Adam and Eve, with whom no other creation dealt but the Creator alone. It is them that the text calls “The offshoot of My plantations.” Thus, Adam and Eve are called “plantings,” as it is written, “On the day of your planting you will flourish ... a heap of boughs in the day of grief and desperate pain.” On the day when they were planted in the world, they sinned. He speaks of Adam HaRishon and calls them “planting,” as it is written, “On the day of your planting.”
431) The plantations, ZON, were as small as the antenna of grasshoppers, their light was frail, and they did not illuminate. Once they were planted elsewhere, meaning that they rose to AVI and were corrected, their lights grew and they were called “the cedars of Lebanon.” Similarly, before Adam and Eve were planted elsewhere, in ZON, they did not grow in the light and did not emit good fragrance. Of course they were uprooted from their place and were planted above in ZON, and were corrected properly.
And the Lord God Commanded the Man
432) “And the Lord God commanded the man, saying, ‘From any tree of the garden you may eat.’” A command is nothing but idol worship. “The Lord” is the blessing of the Creator; “God” is the judges. “The man” is bloodshed; “Saying” is incest. A command is nothing but idol worship means that anywhere where it is said “Command,” it implies prohibition of idol worship. Here, too, the word indicates “Commanded” means He forbade him to idol worship.
Here Adam HaRishon was commanded seven Mitzvot . “Commanded” is idol worship; “The Lord” is the prohibition of the blessing of the Creator; “God” is the judges, who sentence justly; “The man” is the prohibition on bloodshed; “Saying” is the prohibition on incest. “From any tree of the garden,” and not what is stolen, “You may eat,” and not an organ from an animal.
“From any tree of the garden you may eat” indicates that He permitted him to eat everything, even the tree of knowledge, but he should eat them in a unification, and the tree of knowledge was not in unification with the rest of the trees of the garden.
433) We see that Abraham ate from the tree of knowledge, and Isaac and Jacob and all the prophets ate from the tree of knowledge, yet they lived. But the reason is that that tree, the tree of knowledge, is the tree of death. Anyone who takes it in itself alone dies because he has taken the potion of death. The meaning of the tree of knowledge is the Nukva de ZA. We should always unify her with the rest of the trees of the garden, the Sefirot de ZA, and then we can eat and receive the abundance from her, who is the tree of knowledge.
This is the manner in which Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob and all the prophets ate from her. But one who does not unify the Nukva with ZA her husband, but extends from her herself alone, then she is the potion of death, as it is written, “For in the day that you eat from it you will surely die,” meaning from her alone because he separates and cuts the plantations, separating the Creator from His Divinity. This is why his sentence is death.
434) Adam HaRishon was pulling on his foreskin, separating the holy covenant, Yesod de ZA, from his place and portion, from Divinity. Hence, he was certainly pulling on the foreskin, leaving the holy covenant, the unification of the Creator and His Divinity. He clung to the foreskin, the Klipa, which separates the Creator from His Divinity, and was tempted by the words of the serpent.
435) “And from the fruit of the tree ... ‘You shall not eat from it’ ... lest you die.” “From the fruit of the tree” is the woman, Nukva de ZA. “You shall not eat from it” because it is written, “And her legs go down to death,” meaning that the legs of the Nukva descend to the Klipot, where there is death, meaning if he extends abundance only from her when she is not in Zivug with her husband.
It cannot be said that the tree of knowledge is the Sitra Achra and is not the Nukva de Kedusha because there are fruits in the Nukva de ZA and it can be said about her, “And from the fruit of the tree.” But in the Sitra Achra there are no fruits because another god is sterile and does not bear fruit. So how does the text say about it, “And from the tree of the garden”? Indeed, it is written, “On the day when you eat from it you will surely die.” This is why the tree is called “the tree of death,” although it is the Nukva de Kedusha, as it is written, “And her legs go down to death,” even though she herself is life and Kedusha.
436) That tree, the tree of knowledge, was watered from above. It grew and was glad, as it is written, “And a river comes out of Eden to water the garden.” “The garden” means Nukva de ZA. That river, Bina, enters the Nukva and waters her, giving her Mochin de Gadlut, and everything becomes one. Through these Mochin, ZA and Nukva became one because from there down, below Nukva de ZA, there is already separation and they cannot receive those Mochin, as it is written, “And from there it parted.” It is so because below the garden it is already separated and is not entirely Godliness, since NR de BYA below the Nukva are not Godliness.
And the Serpent Was Cunning
437) “And the serpent was cunning.” The serpent is the evil inclination, who seduces to sin. The serpent was really a serpent, but indeed, it is all one because it was SAM and was seen riding a serpent. The shape of the serpent is Satan, the evil inclination, who seduces people to sin and then rises and slanders. Thus, it is all one. It can be said that the serpent is the evil inclination, and it can be said that it is a real serpent.
438) At that time Angel SAM descended from the heaven and rode that serpent, and all the people saw his shape and fled from him. SAM and the serpent engaged in conversation with the woman and caused death to the world. Indeed, it is with wisdom that SAM brought curses upon the world, that he cunningly seduced them into sinning, and sabotaged the first tree that the Creator created in the world, Adam HaRishon.
439) That matter depended on SAM, him robbing the Mochin and the blessings from Adam HaRishon with his cunningness, making him sin with the tree of knowledge. Finally, the other holy tree came, Jacob, and took the blessings back from SAM so Angel SAM—Esau’s minister—would not be blessed from above, and so that Esau would not be blessed below, since SAM and Esau were built by the ruin of Adam HaRishon. Through the ruin of SAM and Esau, the Kedusha is rebuilt, hence because SAM robbed the blessings from the Kedusha with his cunningness, Jacob retook the blessings from SAM and from Esau with cunningness.
And the reason why it was specifically Jacob who grew strong in that is to return the theft that SAM stole from Adam HaRishon because Jacob was similar to Adam HaRishon. Jacob’s beauty was as the beauty of Adam HaRishon, hence as SAM denied the blessings from the first tree, who is Adam HaRishon, Jacob, who is similar to Adam HaRishon, denied the blessings from SAM above, and from Esau below. Everything that Jacob took, he took from his own, which  SAM stole from Adam HaRishon. This is why it is written, “And a man struggled with him,” being SAM.
440) “And the serpent was cunning.” The serpent is the evil inclination; it is the angel of death. And because the serpent is the angel of death, it caused death to the whole world, seducing Eve to sin with the tree of knowledge. It is written, “The end of every flesh has come before Me,” meaning the angel of death, who puts an end to every flesh, taking the souls from every flesh and is called so, “the end of every flesh.”
441) The serpent started with Af , saying “Although God said.” Thus, he brought with him ire and anger to the world. He said to the woman, “With this tree the Creator created the world,” since the world was created by the Nukva. “Therefore, indeed eat from it and you will be as God, knowing good and evil, and you, too, will be able to create worlds through the Nukva.”
ZA is Elokim. His name is the Nukva, the tree of knowledge of good and evil. Therefore, if you eat from the tree of knowledge, which is his name, meaning they would cling to the Nukva and to her abundance, “And you will be as God,” like ZA, “And you’ll be able to create worlds like him.”
442) The serpent did not say that because had he said, “With this tree the Creator created the world,” it would have been good because the tree is like an axe in the hand of the one who carves with it, since the tree of knowledge is the Nukva de ZA. Had he said that ZA created the world through the Nukva, he would have been telling the truth because he is operating in the Nukva like an axe in the hand of the one who carves with it, for the Nukva has nothing of her own except that which ZA gives her. It follows that the operator is ZA, and this is certainly true.
However, the serpent did not say so. Rather, he said, “The Creator ate from this tree,” meaning that ZA received abundance from the Nukva, and then ZA created the world. Every craftsman hates his friend. Eat from the tree of knowledge and you, too, will be able to create worlds. But this is a complete lie because the Nukva receives everything from ZA, which is why he said, “Because God knows that on the day you eat from it your eyes will open and you will be as God, knowing good and evil.” Because He knows that you will be as God and will create worlds like Him, He commanded you not to eat from it.
443) All his words were lies. He was lying even in the beginning of the words, as it is written, “Although God said, ‘You shall not eat from any tree of the garden,’” it is not so because it is written, “From any tree of the garden you may eat,” so He permitted him everything.
444) Rabbi Yosi said, “The Creator commanded him on idol worship, on blessing the Creator, on the judges, on bloodshed, and on incest.” But how many people were in the world of whom the Creator had to warn him? All those seven Mitzvot were only on that tree, the tree of knowledge, since all those Mitzvot cling to it.
445) Anyone who takes the tree of knowledge—the Nukva alone without her husband ZA—separates between ZA and Nukva. It follows that he takes her imparting in the masses below in the separated BYA, where there are the Klipot, which cling to the tree of knowledge.
By that, he takes upon himself the prohibitions of idol worship, bloodshed, and incest: 1) He breaches with idol worship in those appointed ministers to whom he extends the abundance from the tree of knowledge. It follows that he is working for the appointed, which is idol worship. 2) He breaches with bloodshed because the power of bloodshed depends on that tree, for it is on the left side, Gevura. By that, SAM, Esau’s minister was appointed. 3) He breaches with incest because the tree of knowledge is a woman. It is called “a woman,” Nukva de ZA, and it is forbidden to summon a woman alone, but together with her husband, so he will not be suspected of incest. The sin of the tree of knowledge is that he took the Nukva alone without her husband.
For this reason, in all seven Mitzvot, he was commanded with the prohibition of that tree, the tree of knowledge. Once he ate from it, he breached in all of them because they are all gripped to it.
446) Rabbi Yehuda said, “Of course this matter, the prohibition of the tree of knowledge, is so, since it is forbidden to be alone with a woman unless her husband is with her.” What did that wicked one, SAM, do? He said, “But I have touched that tree and did not die. You too, come near and touch it with your hand and you will not die.” He added that of his own, for touching was not forbidden, but eating.
447) Promptly after she touched the tree of knowledge, it is written, “And the woman saw that the tree was good to eat.” Rabbi Yehuda said, “That tree was emitting fragrances, as it is written, ‘As the smell of a field which the Lord has blessed.’ And because the scent was coming up from it, she coveted it, to eat from it.” Rabbi Yosi says, “Her seeing brought her the coveting to eat from the tree of knowledge, and not the smell, since it is written, ‘And the woman saw.’” Rabbi Yehuda told him, “But after the sin it is written, “And the eyes of both of them were opened.’ Thus, she did not obtain seeing until after the eating. But prior to the eating she obtained only smelling.”
Rabbi Yosi told him, “That seeing prior to the eating was in the measure of the tree, a female light, and that seeing brought her the coveting. But the seeing that she obtained after the eating was to a great extent in regard to the tree. This is why it is written, ‘And the eyes of both of them were opened,’ as it is written, ‘And the woman saw.’ The words ‘The woman’ are accurate, showing that the seeing was in the light of a female.”
448) “And the woman saw that the tree was good.” It is written, “...and took of its fruit.” She saw and she did not see that the tree was good. She saw that the tree was good but she could not decide, since it is written, “...and took of its fruit,” and it is not written, “And she took from it,” from the tree, since she did not make up her mind that the tree was good.
By taking from its fruit and not from the tree, she clung to the place of death and caused death to the entire world, separating life from death because the Yesod, attached to the Nukva, is called “bearing fruit,” and the Nukva is called “fruit.” When the Nukva is alone, without the Yesod, she is death. And when she took from the fruit and not from the tree, it is found that she clung to the place of death, and separated the Yesod, which is life, from the Nukva, which is death, when she is separated from the Yesod.
That sin caused the separation of Nukva from her husband, ZA, since the voice, ZA, and the speech, Nukva, never part, and one who parts the voice from the speech—ZA from Nukva—becomes mute and cannot speak. And when the speaking is denied of him, he is given to the dust. This is why he was told, “And unto dust you shall return.”
449) “I was mute silent; I held my peace from good,” said the Assembly of Israel, Nukva de ZA, during the exile. It is so because the voice, ZA, leads the speech, the Nukva. And since she is in exile, the voice is separated from her, and the speech—Nukva—is not heard. This is why the Nukva said, “I was mute silent,” since “I held my peace from good,” meaning ZA, who is called “good,” and who is the voice. It turns out that the voice is not going with her.
At that time Israel say, “Unto You are silence and praise.” “Silence” is the praise for David, since Nukva is called “praise” when she is in Gadlut. She becomes silence in the exile, she is muted, soundless. “Unto You,” Israel say to ZA, For You is she silent and mute, since the voice, ZA, has moved away from her.
450) “And she took of its fruit.” Eve squeezed grapes and gave it to Adam. By eating them they caused death to the entire world because death resides in the tree of knowledge. It is the tree that governs in the night, the Nukva, “The small light for the governances of the night.” It is written about her, “She rises while it is still night.” And when she governs at night, all the people in the world taste the taste of death, since sleep is one part of 60 of death.
However, those faithful ones hurry and give her their Nefashot  as deposits, saying before they go to sleep, “In Your hand I commit my spirit.” And because the Nefashot are deposited in the Nukva during the governance of the taste of death, they are not harmed, and the Nefashot return to their places by morning, meaning to the bodies. It is written about it, “And Your faith in the nights,” for faith, the Nukva, rules at night.
451) “And the eyes of both of them were opened.” They were opened to know the evils of the world, which they did not know thus far. Once they know and their eyes were opened to know evil, it is written, “And they knew that they were naked,” for they lost the upper brightness that was hovering over them. It departed from them and they were left naked.
452) “And they sewed fig-leaves,” meaning they clung to cover in the shades of the tree from which they had eaten because the leaves of the tree cast shade beneath them. There is a shade from the Kedusha, as it is written, “In its shade I delighted to sit,” and there is a shade from the Klipa, as it is written, “God has made one opposite the other.” Once they sinned in the tree of knowledge, it cast upon them the shade of the tree of death, which is the shadow of death. And where they initially had the upper brightness, which was hovering over them, they were now in the shade of the Klipa, called fig-leaves.
“And made themselves girdles.” Once they knew of this world and clung to it, they saw that this world was led by those leaves of the tree and made themselves strengthening by which to be strengthened in this world. It is so because prior to the sin the world was led only by the Kedusha. By the sin of the tree of knowledge they cast the Mochin from the degrees of Kedusha, the Klipot were filled by the ruin of the Kedusha, and the guidance was placed in the hands of the Sitra Achra, as it is written, “The earth was placed in the hand of the wicked.”
It follows that along with the sin of the tree of knowledge, the fig-leaves, which are the shades of the Sitra Achra that dominated this world, were given power and governance. Then they know every kind of charm in the world and wish to gird arms because of those leaves of the tree to protect themselves.
453) Three entered the Din and were sentenced, the serpent, Adam, and Eve. The bottom world has been cursed and did not return to its state due to the filth of the serpent, until Israel stood by Mount Sinai. At that time the filth stopped.
454) After the sin the Creator clothed them in clothes that the skin enjoys and not the Nefesh, as it is written, “Garments of skin.” Initially, they had garments of light, which the upper ones would use on their way up, since high angels would come to Adam HaRishon to enjoy that light, as it is written, “You have made him a little lower than God, and You crown him with glory and majesty.” But now that they sinned they were given garments of leather, which the skin enjoys, the body and not the soul.
455) Afterwards they begot the first son, who was the son of the filth of the serpent. Two came over Eve, Adam and the serpent. She conceived from them and begot two, Cain and Abel. One came out to the side of its progenitor, and the other came out to the side of its progenitor. Their spirit was separated—one to the side of Kedusha and one to the side of Tuma’a. One resembles its Behina, and the other resembles its Behina, the side from which they emerged.
By heeding the advice of the serpent, he cast his filth in her, and the filth of the serpent mixed in Eve’s body. Later Adam came up on her, and it is considered that she was impregnated from both, from the serpent’s filth and from Adam HaRishon’s Kedusha. First emerged Cain, who was mixed with the serpent’s filth. Afterwards, once the filth had come out of Eve along with the birth of Cain, Abel came out in the Kedusha of Adam HaRishon.
456) All the sections of evil kinds, spirits, demons, and charmers come from Cain’s side. From Abel’s side extend more Rachamim  to the world, but not in completeness. It is like a good wine mixed with bad wine. The world was not corrected by him until Shet  was born and all the generations of the world’s righteous were related after him, and the world was established with him, while from Cain came all the insolent, sinners, and wicked of the world.
457) When Cain sinned he feared because he saw before him various armed camps that came to kill him. When he repented, he said, “Behold, You have driven me this day from the face of the earth, and from Your face I will be hidden ... and whoever finds me will kill me,” for he feared the camps that came to kill him.
“From Your face I will be hidden” because he said, “I will be hidden and ruined from my structure,” since Cain was a husbandman, and once He drove him out of the land, his whole structure came apart and nothing was left for him in the world. Moreover, “From Your face I will be hidden,” as it is written, “And He did not hide His face from him.” It is also written, “And Moses hid his face.” Cain said about that, “From Your face I will be hidden,” saying “I will be hidden from Your face so I am not noticed.” Hence, “Whoever finds me will kill me.”
And the Lord Set a Token for Cain
458) “And the Lord set a token for Cain.” He placed on him one of the 22 letters of the Torah, the letter Vav, to protect him, since the letter Vav is a token of the covenant with which he was rewarded after he had repented and took upon himself the keeping of the covenant.
Rabbi Yehuda said, ‘And it came to pass, when they were in the field, that Cain rose up against Abel his brother, and killed him.’ ‘In the field’ means a woman. Hence, Cain killed Abel because of a woman, since from the side of a woman, the left side, he inherited the power of murdering, the side of SAM, which caused death to the entire world by seducing Adam and Eve with the tree of knowledge. Cain envied Abel for the Nukva, the additional Nukva that Abel had.
The meaning of the soul of Cain and Abel is that Abel is MI and Cain is ELEH. It is known that MI extend from upper AVI, and ELEH extend from YESHSUT, which are two females in AVI, Man’ula and Miftacha . But they emanated to YESHSUT only in Miftacha, who is one Nukva. It follows that Cain, who was extended in the form of ELEH, had only one Nukva, Miftacha. But Abel had two females, of Man’ula and of Miftacha. This is why Cain envied Abel for his additional Nukva, the Nukva de Man’ula.
Rabbi Hiya said, “But we see the reason for Abel’s killing, as it is written, ‘But to Cain and to his offering He did not respond, and Cain became very angry’ for his offering was not accepted, and not because of a Nukva, as Rabbi Yehuda said.” Rabbi Yehuda told him, “So it is that Cain was angered by his offering not being accepted, and everything was before him when he killed Abel, meaning the envy for the additional Nukva, too.”
459) “And the Lord said unto Cain ... If you do well, moreover; and if you do not do well, sin crouches at the door.” The Creator told him, “If you improve your works then moreover. “Moreover”  is as it is written of Reuben, Jacob’s first born, “Reuben, you are my firstborn, my might, and the first of my strength,” since the firstborn always has merit and advantage in everything, and depends on his works. This is why the Creator said to him, “If you do well.” “And if you do not do well, sin crouches at the door.”
Sin Crouches at the Door
460) “Sin crouches at the door.” “At the door,” the door of above, from which Dinim come out for the bad deeds of the people of the world. A door is as it is written, “Open for me the gates of Tzedek ,” the gates of Malchut, who is called Tzedek. The sin, the angel of death who is destined to avenge you, crouches at that door of Malchut.
461) Adam was born on Rosh Hashanah  above and below, in ZON, who is called “the upper Adam,” and in the Adam of below. There is Rosh Hashanah above, ZON, when they are in Din, and there is Rosh Hashanah below, Rosh Hashanah when it is the sixth day of the creation of the world, in which the lower Adam was created. By that he tells us that Adam was created in Din because he was created on Rosh Hashanah of below, which extends from its corresponding Behina above, from Rosh Hashanah of above, ZON during the Din.
On Rosh Hashanah, the barren are visited. How do we know it was on Rosh Hashanah? Because it is written, “And the Lord visited Sarah.” “The Lord” indicates that the visiting was on Rosh Hashanah, since wherever it is said, “And the Lord,” it indicates ZA and his courthouse, which is Rosh Hashanah of above.
And because Adam was born on Rosh Hashanah, he was born in Din, and at time when the world stands in Din. Hence, of course sin crouches at the door, who is the angel of death, to avenge you, as it is written, “And unto you is its desire,” meaning of the angel of death, to punish you until he destroys you.
462) “Sin crouches at the door, and unto you is its desire, and you will rule over it,” as it is written, “And you preserve them all,” meaning Malchut, called “You preserve all,” even the Klipot. Thus, the Creator does not control, meaning His dominion is not revealed unless when the wicked of the world are destroyed. For this reason, when the angel of death destroys them, the Creator will rule over it and will not let it harm the world because it is written, “And you,” which is Malchut, “will rule over it.”
That is, Malchut will rule over the angel of death after he has already executed judgment against the wicked, and will no longer let it harm the people of the world. The words “And you” in the verse, “And you will rule over it,” are the name of the Malchut.
463) The governance is in the connection of the dispute to sentence them and to keep the Din. “And you will rule over it” means that Malchut reveals her governance through the angel of death, as he punishes the sinners. Also, “You will rule over it” by repentance. If he repents, he will rule over the evil inclination and the angel of death.
Aza and Azael
464) When the generations of Cain were walking in the world, they would equalize and smooth out the earth, and they were similar to the angels above and to people below. It is so because Cain was of the filth of SAM who came over Eve, and who was an angel, as well as from Adam’s semen. Because of the mightiness of Cain’s children, with their walking, they made the mountains and the valleys in the land into a plain. When Aza and Azael fell from their place of Kedusha from above, they saw the daughters of men and sinned with them, begetting children. They are as it is written, “The fallen ones were in the land in those days, and also afterwards, when the sons of God came in unto the daughters of men and bore children to them.”
465) Cain’s sons were the sons of the gods because when SAM came up on Eve, he cast filth in her and she conceived and bore Cain. Hence, his form was not similar to that of the rest of the people because he was an offspring of an angel. Likewise, all those who come from the side of Cain were called “children of the gods” because their appearance was that of angels, who are called “gods.”
466) Even the fallen ones, who are the sons of Aza, Azael and Naama, are called “children of the gods,” as well, as it is written, “They are the mighty ones,” indicating diminution, for only they are the mighty ones and not the first fallen ones who were in the earth, since they were 60, as the count of above, opposite VAK, HGT NHY de ZA. It is written, “Those were the mighty ones who were from the world, men of renown.” It is also written regarding King Solomon, ZA, “Behold, it is the bed of Solomon; sixty mighty men around it.” Here, too, it is 60, but the first ones extend from VAK.
Also, “Those were the mighty ones who were from the world,” actually from the world, unlike the first fallen ones, who were Aza and Azael, who were from above the world. The world is the Nukva de ZA. Those fallen ones were established as the Merkava  of ZON and became part of the Nukva, who is called “world.”
467) “Actually from the world” means that they were given for a Merkava for the Nukva, whom the Creator took from the lower world. After they fell into the lower world, scrutinies were made of them, and those scrutinies connected into the Nukva’s Merkava. But the first fallen ones did not have anything of the lower world because they were angels in heaven, as it is written, “Remember Your Rachamim , O Lord, and Your Hassadim , for they are from the world,” meaning that the Creator took the Rachamim and Hassadim from the lower world to be a holy Merkava above, and they are the first patriarchs.
“Your Rachamim” are Jacob and “Your Hassadim” are Abraham, who rose from the lower world. They were rewarded with being a Merkava for ZON above because the patriarchs are the Merkava. Here, too, they are the mighty men that are from the world, who also rose from the lower world and connected above in the Merkava of ZON. “From the world” is Solomon’s bed, the Nukva, but from the Gevura, as it is written, “Behold, it is the bed of Solomon; sixty mighty men around it.” All of them, all sixty mighty men around Solomon’s bed are called “the children of the gods.”
468) When the Creator created the man, He created him in the Garden of Eden and commanded him seven Mitzvot . He sinned in the tree of knowledge and was expelled from the Garden of Eden. Two angels of heaven, Aza and Azael, said to the Creator, “If we were in the earth, like the man, we would be righteous.” The Creator told them, “Can you overcome the evil inclination, which is governing on earth?” They said to Him, “We can.” Promptly, the Creator dropped them from heaven. When they came down to earth, the evil inclination entered them, as it was said, “And they took for them women.” They sinned and were uprooted from their Kedusha.
469) All the plantations, which are the Sefirot de ZON, were concealed, and fine Reshimot were in one place, in Malchut. Afterwards the Creator uprooted them from there and sent them elsewhere, to Bina, where they existed, meaning obtained their Moachs.
This Is the Book of the Generations of Adam
470) “This is the book of the generations of Adam.” Three books open in the Nukva on Rosh Hashanah : one of complete righteous, one of complete wicked, and one of intermediate. He explains only the one of complete righteous.
There is an upper book in Nukva, Bina, from whom comes everything. Writing, too, comes out from her.
There is a middle book in Nukva, which includes above and below, ZA, who includes Bina and Malchut together. It is called “the written Torah,” and it is Adam HaRishon from the four Behinot Adam in ABYA, Adam de Atzilut.
There is a third book in Nukva, called “The Generations of Adam,” an offspring of ZA, who is called Adam . It is a book of complete righteous. It is written, “This is the book of the generations of Adam,” who is certainly a righteous, Yesod de ZA, bearing fruits.
The three books are three Mochin, RTS  that ZA gives to the Nukva: 1) Mochin from Bina, the upper book. 2) Its own Mochin, the middle book. 3) Mochin from its Yesod, the third book, the book of generations, since offspring come out from Yesod, and not from any Sefira. It is also called “The Book of the Righteous,” since Yesod is called “righteous.”
It is written, “On the day when God created man, He made him in the likeness of God.” It is so because then, once The Book of the Generations of Adam was revealed, everything was established above and below, and both of them existed in one order. That is, the order of existence, the elicitation of Mochin of the bottom world, Adam and Eve, is equal to the order of existence of the upper world, ZON.
“He created them male and female” is an abstruse phrase. He should have said, “He created them man and woman,” since one was included in the other—the female was included in the male—when they were created, since they were two Partzufim, and afterwards He sawed them off.
471) It is written, “A strong tower is the name of the Lord; the righteous will run in it and is high.” “Righteous” is as it is written, “The book of the generations of Adam,” who is running in that tower. It is the tower of David, Malchut. This is the meaning of “A strong tower is the name of the Lord,” and it is all one. A tower is the name of Malchut in Gadlut—a tower means Gadlut. There is a secret here—known to those of faith—in the combinations of names that emerge from the words, “A tower of strength.” This is certainly the book of generations, meaning the righteous Yesod, who makes offspring through the tower.
Mem-Bet-Shin Ayin-Vav-Yod Mem-Yod-Tzadi etc., is a combination of 36 letters in twelve boxes, each box containing three letters. They come out from the verse, “A strong tower is the name of the Lord; the righteous and high will run in it,” the Lord is righteous.
In the length of the first column, Mem-Bet-Shin Gimel-Reish-Gimel Dalet-Tzadi-Bet Lamed-Kof-Hey, you find the four letters of Migdal  in the initials. In the length of the second column, Ayin-Vav-Yod Vav-Vav-Hey Zayin-Dalet-Vav Shin-Vav-Hey, you find in the initials the four letters of Oz  and the letter Shin from the word Shem . In the length of the third column, Mem-Yod-Tzadi Yod-Tzadi-Dalet Hey-Yod-Yod Vav-Nun-Kof, you find four letters in the initials: Mem from the word Shem , and the letters Yod-Hey-Vav from HaVaYaH. You will find the bottom Hey of that HaVaYaH in the last letter in the name Lamed-Kof-Hey.
You will find the words, “The righteous ... will run in it,” in the middle letters of the boxes in the width of the columns. In the width of the first column, Mem-Bet-Shin Ayin-Vav-Yod Mem-Yod-Tzadi, you will find two letters Bet-Vav and the letter Yod from the word Yarutz “will run.” In the width of the second column, Gimel-Reish-Gimel Vav-Vav-Hey Yod-Tzadi-Dalet, you will find Reish-Vav-Tzadi  from “will run.” In the third column, Dalet-Tzadi-Bet Zayin-Dalet-Vav Hey-Yod-Yod, you will find Tzadi-Dalet-Yod from Tzadik . You will find the Kof from Tzadik in the name Lamed-Kof-Hey in the width of the last column, Lamed-Kof-Hey Shin-Vav-Hey Vav-Nun-Kof.
In the name Shin-Vav-Hey there is the Vav of VeNisgav , and in the name Vav-Nun-Kof in the last column there is a Nun of VeNisgav. At the ends of the words of the length of the first column you will find the letters Shin-Gimel-Bet of VeNisgav, and you will find the name HaVaYaH Tzadik  at the ends of the words of the length of the second and third columns.
472) Of course they lowered a book for Adam HaRishon, and in it he knew and attained the upper wisdom. It is written about it, “This is the book of the generations of Adam.” That book comes to the children of the gods, the sages of the generation, and anyone rewarded with looking in it knows in it sublime wisdom. They look in it and attain in it, and that book lowered the owner of the secrets, Angel Raziel, to Adam HaRishon in the Garden of Eden, with three appointed angels before him, guarding the book lest the external ones get hold of it.
473) When Adam came out of the Garden of Eden he was still holding that book. When he came out, the book fled from him. He prayed and cried before his Master, and He returned the book to him as before so the wisdom would not be forgotten from the sons of Adam and they would engage to know their Master.
474) Also, Hanoch  had a book, and that book was from the place of the book of the generations of Adam. That book is the wisdom because it was taken from the earth and became an angel in the heaven. It is written, “And he was gone because God had taken him,” and he was the youth. He was called “youth” everywhere, as it is written, “Hanoch  the youth,” indicating that Enoch was a youth because he became a serving youth for Divinity.
475) All the upper secrets were given to him, and he gives and passes them to all who are worthy of them, and do the Creator’s mission. A thousand keys were given to him, and a hundred blessings he takes each day and unifies unifications for his Master. That is, the Sefirot of Hochma are a thousand, and the Sefirot of Bina are a hundred. Keys mean ways of extension. The keys of the wisdom were given to him, as well as a hundred blessings of Bina. The Creator took him from the world so he would delight Him on high.
476) From that was the book—called The Book of Enoch—given to him, since when the Creator took him, He showed him all those upper secrets and the secret of the tree of life inside the garden, its leaves and its branches. In his book, we see all the secrets, everything that God had shown him when He took him on high. Happy are those upper Hassidim  to whom the upper wisdom is revealed, and from whom it is never forgotten, as it is written, “The secret of the Lord is to those who fear Him, and His covenant to let them know it.”
My Spirit Shall Not Abide in Man
477) “And the Lord said, ‘My spirit shall not abide in man forever, for he is also flesh.’” At that time, prior to the flood, the river that stretches out of Eden, from Bina, emitted a high Ruach  from the tree of life, ZA, and imparted in the tree, Nukva, and spirits that live inside people extended from them. Because of it, they lived many days.
The Sefirot are hundreds. And since the spirits of the living were drawn from Bina, people lived for centuries. The days of their lives were 700 years, corresponding to ZAT de Bina, and if in Gevurot then 800 years, as well as in 900 years. Hence, they lived many days until their wickedness went up on high and they stood at the door, as it is written, “Sin crouches at the door.” At that time the upper spirit from Bina departed from the tree, the Nukva, when the Neshamot flee from people.
That is, the upper spirit from Bina departed from the Nukva and only the Ruach of ZA remained in her while the Neshamot flee only from the side of ZA and his Nukva, as it is written, “My spirit shall not abide in man,” from Bina in man. “Forever” means giving her My spirit forever, when Neshamot from ZON flee from people. Therefore, since Bina never gives Neshamot , and now there are Neshamot only from ZA, whose Sefirot are tens, the years of our lives are only 70 years, corresponding to ZAT de ZA, while if in Gevurot then 80 years, meaning by the grip of GAR, up to 100 years, when he seemingly passes and is cancelled from the world.
478) “For he is also flesh.” “Is also” is Moses because in Gematria, he is Shin-Mem-Hey (345), like Mem-Shin-Hey , who illuminates to the moon. It is for this force that people live long days in the world. The inner Daat of ZA is called Moses, and he extends the light of Bina to the Nukva, whose Sefirot are hundreds, hence people lived many days in her.
It is written, “And his days were one hundred and twenty years,” implying to Moses, who lived 120 years, and by whom the Torah was given. At the time of the giving of the Torah, he imparted life to people from that tree of life that comes out of Eden clothed in it from Bina. Had Israel not sinned, they would have always received the life from the tree of life and they would not have died. It is written, “Carved on the tablets,” indicating that there was freedom from the angel of death, since the tree of life—from whom eternal life extends—was extending downward.
479) This is why it is written, “For he is also flesh,” since “For he is also flesh” means Moses, clothed in the flesh of the body, the matter of imparting the eternal spirit of life depends on him. “For he is also,” which is Moses, gripped above and gripped below, meaning ZA of above is also called Moses. Hence the writing makes the precision, “For he is also flesh,” indicating that it refers to Moses of below, who is clothed in flesh.
That is, through the giving of Torah there will be freedom from the angel of death. Hence, Moses did not die, but was gathered from the world into the upper world, to ZA, where it illuminates to the moon, the Nukva. It is so because although the sun was gathered from the world, it did not die. That is, it is not cancelled but enters and illuminates to the moon. So is Moses, who parted from the lower world and illuminates to the moon in the upper world.
480) Also, “For he is also flesh” because by extending the spirit of life in people for a long time, the spirit returned to being flesh, like a body, following the lusts of the body and engaging in possessions of this world. The meaning of the words, “My spirit shall not abide in man forever, for he is also flesh” is that he will not extend the spirit of life in man for many days because by prolonging the time, the spirit is returned to being flesh.
481) All the generations that were perfected and came from Seth were all righteous and Hassidim. Afterwards they expanded in the world, begot children, and learned the crafts of the world, to destroy with spears and swords. That is, they lived by their swords until Noah came and corrected for them the correction of the world, and to toil and to correct the land. It is so because in the beginning they would not sow and plow, for they were living by their swords. But afterwards they needed it, as it is written, “While the earth remains, seedtime and harvest shall not cease.” Thus, at that time there were seeding and harvesting in the world.
482) The Creator is destined to correct the world and correct the spirit of life in people so they prolong their days forever, as it is written, “For as the days of the tree are the days of My people.” It is also written, “Death shall be swallowed up forever, and the Lord God shall wipe away the tear from all faces, and will remove the disgrace of His people from the whole earth, for the Lord has spoken.”